# World in the Grip of an Idea 1: The Idea

[Saturday, January 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/january-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

Sometimes a phrase is concocted to say something that hardly *needed* saying
before. These phrases should be of interest, for they frequently tell us
something about what is new and different to our time. Such a phrase is
"displaced person." It came into currency sometime around World War II. "DP's,"
they were called collectively just after World War II, people who could be seen
wandering here and there across Europe , the remains of their pitiful
possessions on their backs. They were Germans driven from their homes by the
Czechoslovak government, Poles, Russians, Rumanians, Letts, Ukrainians, brought
thither to work for the Germans and now uncertain what to do or where to go.
They were Jews now seeking some new homeland. War had caused these peoples to be
transported hither and yon; now revolution was completing their displacement.

"Displaced" is a strange word to use in connection with persons. The most common
word formed from "displace" is "displacement." It is used to describe what
happens, for example, when a body is placed in water. A certain volume of water
is "displaced," is moved from where it was to a new location. It is a mechanical
operation in character. That is why it is unusual to use such a phrase to refer
to people. They have wills; they may choose; they are not something to be
"displaced," as if they were water. Yet, the phrase is apt. These people were as
near to being displaced as people are likely to be. They had been taken, held,
and moved against their wills. The human forces that swept over them had
displaced them.

## Displaced Persons

The phrase, "displaced person," has fallen into
disuse. Many young people may never have heard it. This is unfortunate, for it
may be the best single phrase to describe much that has happened in the
twentieth century. It could well be used to describe the Russian nobility who
sought refuge elsewhere following or before the victory of the Red Army. Kaiser
Wilhelm II became a displaced person when his government fell at the end of
World War I. Many persons were displaced after that war as the boundaries in
central and eastern Europe were redrawn. Most of the Jews in Germany and Poland
were displaced in one way or another by the Nazis. Millions were displaced when
India and Pakistan were divided into separate states. Arabs were displaced by
the creation of the modern state of Israel. Millions of Chinese Nationalists
were displaced by the victory of the Communists on the mainland of China. Many
white residents were displaced from Africa when black rule was established in
countries on that continent. Tens of thousands of Cubans have been displaced by
the Castro regime. The same has now happened, or is happening, in South Vietnam.

I am aware, of course, that some of the peoples referred to above are not
technically displaced persons; they are what is known as refugees. But they are,
nonetheless, displaced persons. They have been displaced by revolutions and
changes over which they had no control. They may have chosen to migrate, but
they did not choose to lose their places which led them to migrate. Men are as
surely displaced by revolutions as water is displaced when a ship is launched.
This displacement, and the efforts to avoid displacement, are a major theme of
this study.

If the idea of displacement is to serve adequately, however, it must be
expanded. There is literal displacement and figurative displacement. In the
figurative sense, it is possible to be displaced and yet never actually move
from the original location. Partial and figurative displacement is widespread in
the twentieth century. It is not as dramatic as the actual displacement but it
is just as real in its own way.

Being in place for a person means being in familiar surroundings. One's sense of
being in place grows out of familiarity with the customs, the traditions, the
mores, and styles and either having adjusted to or being in accord with them.
The sense of being in place, too, is bolstered by control of one's life and
livelihood. Owning property actually provides a place for a person. (Our folk
language recognizes this role for property by calling a homestead a "place" or,
sometimes, a "home-place.") Place also has the connotation of position, as
within a family, a community, an industry, or some organization. There is, too,
man's place in the chain of being ( "a little lower than the angels," it used to
be held). Our sense of order, of security, and of well-being are connected with
being in place. These, in turn, are essential to creativity and productivity.

## Displacement by Force

The world is in the grip of an idea today. The
thrust of the idea is to replace man, to remove the supports for him in the
position that he occupies and to force him into a new place or configuration.
The impact of the application of this idea is to displace people. The degree of
the displacement is in some sort of proportion to the force exerted but in its
subtler dimensions depends on the sensitivities of the persons involved.

Men resist this displacement in a variety of ways. But it is no easy matter to
resist it. Resistance requires a place to stand. Any degree of displacement
makes outright resistance difficult, and it becomes precarious or dangerous to
resist by confrontation. As displacement becomes more pronounced, people tend to
conform outwardly but to resist by evasion and by subtle attempts to manipulate
power to their own advantage.

Literal displacement is easy enough to recognize. We may not be generally aware
of the scale on which it has occurred in the twentieth century, but it does come
to our attention from time to time in the midst of *wars *and revolutions
as people flee from the advancing tyranny or are shoved out of their homelands.
Figurative displacement, however, is not so readily discerned. After all, if
people remain more or less where they have been, how could we tell that they
have been displaced? The answer is this: we know it mainly by the way they
behave toward the power over them. People who are being displaced in place, so
to speak, attempt to thwart the displacing power by evasion and manipulation.

This sort of activity is by now well developed and deeply ingrained in the
Soviet Union. Of course, millions have been displaced in that unhappy land over
the years, the most dramatic displacement being that of those transported to
slave labor camps. But those who never suffered such displacement have undergone
a different kind of displacement. The reaction of these is discussed at length
by Hedrick Smith in his recent book on *The Russians.* A recurring theme is
that of how Russians make life tolerable for themselves within the repressive
system by evasions, manipulations, connivings, and other imaginative ways. He
describes it this way:

> It fascinated me that there were such cunning devices for foiling the
> authorities and that Russians, of all people, supposedly being a nation of
> sheep, would resort to such expedients. For the notion of the totalitarian
> state, perhaps useful for political scientists as a bird's-eye view of Soviet
> society, misses the human quotient. It conjures up the picture of robots
> living a regimented existence. Most of the time, it is true, the vast majority
> of Russians go through the motions of publicly observing the rules. But
> privately, they are often exerting enormous efforts and practicing uncommon
> ingenuity to bend or slip through these rules for their own personal ends.
> "Slipping through is our national pastime," a woman lawyer smilingly commented
> to me.[^1_1]

These people, it appears, have no hope of altering the power over them, their
only hope being to carve out as much of a place for themselves as they can in
hidden niches. Smith describes their attitude this way:

> You also find an unbridgeable chasm between the leaders and the led: between
> "Them" at the top and "us" at the bottom….
>
> For the common man, politics and the power of the leaders are like the natural
> elements. No ordinary mortal—worker, peasant, intellectual, Party member—dreams
> of doing anything about them. They are simply a given, a fact, irresistible and
> immutable...[^1_2]

Something akin to this is happening in the United States. The thrust of the
government is something alien to the American people, yet beyond their power
apparently to alter. Americans strive to evade the impact of the government's
thrust or to manipulate it to their advantage.

Many exert extensive efforts to keep as much of their income as possible. They
pay lawyers, hire tax consultants, tailor their activities, arrange their
accounts and investments so *as* to *pay as little* by way of taxes as
possible. They seek out investments which will enable them to delay for the
longest time the payment of taxes on whatever they have. They use whatever
influence they can muster to get as large a tax write-off as possible in their
particular undertakings. They ferret out just those investments which provide
the best hedges against inflation.

Many businessmen have given up efforts to prevent government regulation of their
activities. But they exert massive efforts to make these regulations work to
their advantage. When there was talk of deregulation of the airline industry
recently, several top executives in the industry spoke out against it. On the
other hand, they do not spare expense in attempting to get advantages for their
own companies, and sometimes for the whole industry. They collect reams of data,
hire astute lawyers, propagandize, and otherwise seek to influence government
policy in their behalf.

It is generally claimed that "white collar crimes" are on the increase in
America. "White collar crimes," for any who do not know, are crimes committed
by evasion, avoidance, and violation of government regulations, controls, and
restrictions on economic activities. "Tokenism" has even entered our language as
a word to signify not so much minimal compliance with regulations as making an
appearance of complying by doing one or a few times what is generally required.

## Breaking the Rules

Americans in general often ignore or violate the
rules and regulations they are supposed to observe. I had occasion recently to
spend an hour or so in and about the lobby in a large hospital. There were signs
all over the place: knock before entering, no smoking in this area, wear shoes
and shirts for health reasons, exit here, enter there, go there, and return
here, among others.

The state legislature had seen fit in its last session to make it a misdemeanor
to smoke in public places where *signs* had been erected prohibiting it.
Even so, I saw a hospital attendant dressed in white light *a* cigarette
for a patient in such an area. Other people lighted up, too, oblivious to the
law under which they might be punished. Although shoes were prescribed, a
scantily clad young woman sitting in the row of chairs behind me hoisted her
bare feet up on the back of the chair beside me. Other bare feet were in
evidence. And, though shirts were prescribed, I had hardly gained entrance to
the hospital before I saw a young man who had obviously just been treated
walking down the hallway *sans* shirt.

There is considerable evidence that this practice of evasion has entered the
legislative and executive branches of the government as well. Some members of
Congress practice fairly open ways of evading the laws that they lay down for
themselves. Nepotism on the staffs of Congressmen is now prohibited. Even so,
Jack Anderson has reported a considerable number of instances where wives,
children, and other relatives of Congressmen are employed by their colleagues or
by Congressional committees. Undoubtedly such employment Is a thinly disguised
evasion of the rule against nepotism.

But the best example may well be that of behavior in the Executive branch
connected with the Watergate Affair. The Nixon men behaved like displaced
persons. Their actions were not what we would expect of men holding the reins of
political power. They were for all the world like those out of power, like petty
plotters in a "banana republic" seeking to spring themselves into power by some
coup. They were not confidently exercising the full powers of government to
consolidate their positions within it. They went outside the government to bring
in men to violate the law. Then, they attempted to conceal from the
government-at-large what they were doing. It was as if they were alien to the
government.

## Ideas Have Consequences

There is an explanation for these developments,
for the alienation from government, for the evasion and manipulation, for the
displacement or efforts to displace which prompts it all. The explanation can be
found in an idea. Ideas have consequences, the late Richard Weaver pointed out
some years back in a powerful treatise on the subject. What we have been
examining are consequences of *an idea* that efforts are being made to
apply. The elective branches of the government in the United States have been in
considerable degree displaced in the government by the bureaucracy and the
judiciary. As the power and sway of government has grown, decision making has
more and more shifted to the more permanent members and branches of government.
As the grip of the idea increases, the displacement of all except those who
wield power in the name of the idea becomes more pronounced.

What is the idea? Can it be named? That is not so easy to answer. There are
names aplenty for the movements spawned by the idea. The most commonly used
generic name for the movement is socialism. Some call it by the even more
inclusive name of collectivism. The more virulent wing of the movement is known
as communism. Another wing is called by such varied names as evolutionary
socialism, gradualism, Fabianism, democratic socialism, and so on. At a deeper
level, the broad general movement is called by the somewhat more obscure name,
the new humanism.

These are useful terms, and anyone writing about the idea which has the world in
its grip will surely find employment for them. But they do not name the idea,
though the phrase—the new humanism—may come close to it. They actually name
methods and emphases, not the idea which animates them. Even communists refer to
socialism as the end and think of it as the idea, but it is not. It is a means,
if it is anything. This does not mean that some people do not, as individuals,
confuse these means with the end and the idea. Nothing is more likely than that
they would, nor more certain than that they do. But these things named are
offshoots of the idea, not the idea.

## Keep It Nameless

The animating idea has no name. It has no name because
there is no name which its adherents accept. It is utopianism. But there is
hardly a person to be found who will avow it *as* his belief. "Utopianism"
is a contemptuous designation. In common usage, *a* utopian is one who is
impractical and unrealistic. It has no name, probably, because to name a thing
is to risk trivializing it, to profane it, to circumscribe and limit it, and to
vulgarize it.

The Second Commandment prescribes that God shall not be represented by any
image. There is a deep insight behind this commandment. A god who can be
represented by a statue is a god among other gods. He who cannot be represented
in such a way is *the* God, the like of which there are no other gods.
Whether some such insight has prevented the idea in question from being given a
generally accepted name I do not know. It makes sense, however, that if the idea
were named it would become an idea among ideas. It would become an idea to be
examined, to be debated, possibly to be refuted, and certainly to be
scrutinized.

Such treatment, the adherents of the idea apparently resist. They resist it by
focusing upon the method for realizing it rather than the animating idea. The
idea itself must be an unchallenged good. It must be the pearl beyond price, the
holy grail, the Covenant borne in the Ark, and "The Lost Chord," all rolled
into one. I have deliberately used religious terminology to evoke the character
of the idea. For the animating idea is the root of a secular religion, the
leading secular religion of our time. It catches up myriad *vague* longings
set loose by the decline of religion, or, more precisely, it provides a faith
with credible promises for those who no longer believe the promises of their
traditional religions.

## Universal Harmony

The idea is this: *To achieve human felicity on this
earth by concerting all efforts toward its realization.* This is, on its
face, a most attractive idea. A host of other ideas are clustered around it,
too, adding to its glow, such ideas as: harmony, brotherhood, progress, peace,
prosperity, comradeship, cooperation, equality, humanitarianism, solidarity, an
end to the exploitation of man by man, fulfillment through sharing in a common
effort, and so on. Who would deny that it would be good if we would all work
together for the felicity of all? If this but animated us, would not all those
barriers fall away which now separate man from man, group from group, race from
race, and nation from nation? Think of the vast amount of energy expended on our
contentions with one another. What if, instead, it were constructively employed
for our mutual benefit and felicity? It is, indeed, an attractive idea, one to
which men of good will are disposed to give their assent.

There is, however, a rather large fly in this ointment. In fact, there may be
several, but let us focus on one. There is bountiful evidence that we are not in
agreement as to what would constitute our felicity. One man's felicity is often
enough another's torment. One man's felicity entails climbing Mount Everest to
stand at its crest amidst frigid howling winds. Another, probably most of us,
would prefer to be at home watching the ascent on television, if that were
possible. One man's felicity is a full stomach after a hearty meal, even if the
eventual result is obesity. Another will deny himself perpetually in order to
remain slim.

It is not that some of us do not share some of the same or similar preferences.
It is rather that if we could be observed in the whole of our being and activity
we would be seen to each have an individual pattern whose direction would be to
maintain or achieve a sense of well-being or felicity. These patterns, in turn,
give rise both to our achievements and to the conflicts and contests among us.
Each of us appears to be determined to pursue his own well-being in his own way.

This individuality, these individual patterns, play hob with any concerted
effort to achieve felicity. Utopians, or whatever they should be called, know
this, of course. But they do not accept it as a permanent condition. If they
did, they would have to give up their cause as hopeless at the outset. They do
not conceive this individuality, this determination to pursue one's own interest
in his own way, to be rooted in human nature and the conditions of life on this
planet. Indeed, except as a figure of speech, they are not inclined to recognize
that there is any such thing as human nature. It is just selfishness, they
think, a selfishness that is culturally induced.

## Alter the Culture

There are three prongs to the idea which has the world
in its grip. The first has already been told: To achieve human felicity on this
earth by concerting all efforts to its realization. The second is now before us,
and can be stated in this way: *To root out, discredit, and discard all aspects
of culture which cannot otherwise be altered to divest them of any role in
inducing or supporting the individual's pursuit of his own self-interest.* The
corollary of this is to develop an ethos which focuses attention on what is
supposed to be the common good of humanity.

It *is* easy not to be aware of how radical socialism really is. For one
thing, we have become acclimated to many ideas associated with it. For another,
in lands where gradualism holds sway it is often not avowed as an ideology, and
the whole pattern of activity associated with it is not perceived as stemming
from it. Yet, it would probably not be possible to conceive a more radical idea
than that of rooting out or altering everything in the culture that is
individualistic.

Socialism is sometimes defined as the public ownership of the means of the
production and distribution of goods. That is quite misleading. It is as if
Christianity were defined as a belief in going to church on Sunday. The idea
that, has the world in its grip, an idea which may for practical purposes be
called socialism, does not simply entail the alteration of ownership; it entails
the alteration of the whole cultural environment.

## Use Government to Transform

How big an undertaking would this be? It is
as big *as,* well, *as* big as all outdoors, or, perhaps, as big as
all indoors, plus much that is outdoors as well. Man is to be transformed by the
destruction or alteration of his culture. According to an old formulation, there
is nature and nurture. Since nature is largely disallowed, there remains only
nurture. What nurtures us, then, is the totality of the culture, as it is
understood by those who hold these ideas. It is just about everything.

By what instrument is this transformation to be made? This brings us to the
third prong of the idea. It is this: Government is the instrument to be used to
concert all efforts behind the realization of *human felicity and the
necessary destruction or alteration of culture.* Government was not the
chosen instrument of those who forged this idea. It was quite often anathema to
them. To use government to achieve human felicity would be akin to a notion such
as that God should have used the Serpent *as* the means of redemption. The
very attractiveness of the idea is that men must long to concert their efforts
to achieve felicity. How could the use of force be introduced into the equation?
Not by choice but out of necessity. The bent of men to pursue their own
self-interest is so ingrained that only government could exorcise it. Force must
be used to free men from the hold of selfishness. Hopefully, of course,
government would be transformed in the process.

This, then, is a distillation of the idea that holds the world in its grip
today. It is not only the idea underlying Soviet Communism or Chinese or
Albanian Communism, but also the idea underlying the Fabianism of the British
Labour Party, Swedish socialism, American liberalism, German Social Democracy,
Canadian interventionism, and the thrust of government into people's lives on a
consistent scale everywhere in the world today. There are particular
articulations of the idea which are important and will be taken up, some of
them, in their place. But the important point here is that they all arise from a
certain root idea. They arise from a vision of the achievement of human felicity
by a concerted effort by everyone to achieve it. All of them perceive the
received culture as something to be destroyed or altered, depending on the
exigencies of the situation. All of them use government in their attempts to get
concerted efforts.

The proof of these assertions has not yet been introduced. It will be
forthcoming, so much of it as can practically be adduced. But it is necessary to
have this idea before us from the beginning. A great deal of energy has gone
into confusing and obscuring the nature of socialism. In some countries,
measures and activities are never linked to their socialist connection by their
advocates. Thus, if the connections are to be shown, it must be understood from
the beginning what is to be connected. The connection is between the root idea
above and the great variety of socialist efforts going on in the world.

## Totalitarianism

The idea that has the world in its grip is a
totalitarian idea. It does not evince itself in that way in a good many
lands as yet. It may never proceed to that point in some lands, but that does
not keep it from being a totalitarian idea. The totalitarianism is implicit in
the idea. If all constructive activity could be concerted to the end of
achieving human felicity, everyone would be under the sway of the concerting
force. It would be totalitarian whether the concerting force was some world-wide
government, the people, or an idea. Whether it would produce felicity or not
would be a moot question, for there would be no independent judgment to
determine whether it was felicity or universal torment. It is the very condition
of independence that one not be completely concerted. The advancement of the
idea, then, is the advancement toward totalitarianism.

Even so, that is not the connection nor the impact that will occupy most of our
attention. Nowhere has there been sufficient success in applying the idea that a
people could be said to have concerted their efforts. What has happened, and is
happening, is a struggle within lands where the efforts have been made to apply
the idea. It is a struggle between men bent on pursuing their own self-interest
and the rulers who are attempting to make them serve some other interest. It is
the great undeclared war of our era, a war in which many of those most
tenaciously defending themselves openly profess the social emphasis of the
rulers. It is, in its deeper dimensions, the struggle of those being displaced
against their displacers.

The impact which shall most occupy our attention is displacement. The attempt to
remove the basis of individuality evinces itself as an assault upon the
inherited culture. Indeed, all that has been inherited from the past becomes
suspect to those under the sway of the idea, whether it should be called culture
or not. The received social arrangements, the place of women in society, the
place of men in society, the religious tradition, customs, habits, venerable
modes of address and ways of acting, everything which could conceivably give
support to individuality comes under attack. The result is displacement.

Any man's actual as well as sense of place is culturally (as socialists use the
word) derived. It is dependent upon the estimate of those among whom he lives
and works. It relies upon continuity with the past. It is buttressed by family
ties, duties, obligations, and achievements. His property, his savings, that
which is owed to him and which he owes give solidity and backing to him. The
teachings of his childhood have helped to form him. His religion may well
provide him with transcendental support for his beliefs. A part of his
definition as a being is that he is male or female with the meaning that has
been packed into his understanding of the role of these. All the familiar
adjuncts of his being—music, paintings, books, working instruments, language,
furniture, and what not—are cultural artifacts which confirm and bolster his
place.

## Breaking the Ties

The thrust of revolution in our time, and gradualism
is piecemeal revolution, is not simply to divest us of ownership or control of
our property. It is that, of course, but it is so much more. It is to divest us
of our received culture. It is to break the ties that bind the members of family
to one another. It is to sever religion from education. It is to interpenetrate
every relationship with the power of the state, not in support of the individual
but to have the relation determined by social imperatives. It is to so alter the
familiar adjuncts to our being that they are no longer ours but belong to
something beyond us. It is to blur the distinctions between male and female, to
merge the concept of adult and child, to cut away the authority of culture, and
to leave us naked.

The near perfect symbol of what is aimed at is public nudity. Clothes do serve
some useful purposes: to keep us warm in some climes, to shield us from the
burning rays of the sun in others, and pockets are convenient places to store
odds and ends. Aside from that, though, clothes are emblems of all the received
culture by which we maintain our privacy, define our status, and establish our
independent realm. To be naked in public means to most of us to be exposed and
helpless. Our last defenses are gone; we are at the mercy of all who behold us.

Those who claim that nudity would free us do not understand the matter well. To
be disrobed in public no more frees us than to be plucked frees a chicken or to
have the hair scraped off frees a hog. Just as the removal of their natural
covering prepares animals to be consumed so the removal of the clothes of a
person makes him available to be used by others. The removal of cultural
protection is the prelude to tyranny.

## Naked in Public

Two nineteenth-century fantasies come to mind. The first
was written by the beloved teller of fairy tales, Hans Christian Andersen,
called "The Emperor's New Clothes." Men posing as clothiers appeared before the
emperor and promised to make new clothes for him. But they warned that anyone
who was not suited to his job would be unable to see<b> </b>them. The word
spread both that the emperor was to get new clothes and that they would be
invisible to those unsuited to their work. On the appointed day, an elaborate
charade got underway. The non-clothes had been delivered to the palace. Yet
neither those appointed to dress him nor the emperor himself would admit that
there were no clothes; they went through the motions of dressing him and he of
admiring his new haberdashery. The farce continued even when the emperor went
before the public in a parade. At first, all pretended that the emperor was
fully clothed, for none wished to admit the possibility that he alone could not
see them because he was unsuited to his job. At last, however, a child, who
would hardly be intimidated by this possibility, declared that the emperor had
no clothes. That blew the cover, as we would say, or rather the lack of cover,
and others could admit also that the emperor had no clothes.

The second fantasy is from *Sartor Resartus,* Thomas Carlyle's satirical
treatise on clothes. First, Carlyle imagines the king bereft of his clothes in
public:

> "What would Majesty do, could such an accident befall in reality; should the
> buttons all simultaneously start, and the solid wool evaporate, in very Deed,
> as here in Dream? *Ach Gott!* How each skulks into the nearest hiding place;
> their high State Tragedy … becomes a Pickleherring-Farce to weep at, which is
> the worst kind of Farce; *the tables (according* to Horace), and with them,
> the whole fabric of Government, Legislation, Property, Police, and Civilized
> Society, *are dissolved, in* wails and howls."

He continues with a vision of the House of Lords in a similar state:

> Lives the man that can figure a naked Duke of Windlestraw addressing a naked
> House of Lords? Imagination … recoils on itself, and will not forward with the
> picture.[^1_3]

Neither of these fine writers lived to learn of the shocking denouement to their
fantasies in the real life drama of twentieth-century revolution, a denouement,
let it be said, which neither could have intended nor have wittingly
contributed. Nonetheless, the brutal murder of Czar Nicholas II of Russia , his
immediate family and their attendants by their Communist captors is by extension
a denouement to them. Here is a recent account of that horrendous event. As the
account is taken up, the Czar, his family and their attendants have just been
herded into a small basement room and told that they are to be shot:

> Nicholas, his arm still around Alexis, began to rise from his chair to protect
> his wife and son. He had just time to say "What...?" before Yurovsky pointed
> his revolver directly at the Tsar's head and fired. Nicholas died instantly.
> Alexandra had time only to raise her hand and make the sign of the cross
> before she too was killed by a single bullet. Olga, Tatiana and Marie,
> standing behind their mother, were hit and died quickly. Botkin, Kharitonov
> and Trupp also fell in the hail of bullets. Demidova, the maid, survived the
> first volley, and rather than reload, the executioners took rifles from the
> next room and pursued her, stabbing with bayonets. Screaming, running back and
> forth along the wall like a trapped animal, she tried to fend them off with
> the cushion. At last she fell, pierced by bayonets more than thirty times.
> Jimmy the spaniel was killed when his head was crushed by a rifle butt.
>
> The room, filled with the smoke and stench of gunpowder, became suddenly
> quiet.  Blood was running in streams from the bodies on the floor. Then there
> was a movement and a low groan. Alexis [heir to the throne, afflicted during
> his brief life with crippling hemophilia], lying on the floor still in the
> arms of the Tsar, feebly moved his hand to clutch his father's coat. Savagely,
> one of the executioners kicked the Tsarevich in the head with his heavy boot.
> Yurovsky stepped up and fired two shots into the boy's ear. Just at that
> moment, Anastasia, who had only fainted, regained consciousness and screamed.
> With bayonets and rifle butts, the entire band turned on her. In a moment, she
> too lay still. It was ended.[^1_4]

Life was ended, but not the gruesome scenario. The bodies were wrapped in
sheets, loaded on a truck, and taken to another location. There they were
dismembered with saws and axes, burned, and their bones dissolved with acid.
What remained was then thrown down a mine shaft. This ghoulish undertaking had
taken the better part of three days. Though these murders had only been
initially authorized by a local soviet's ruling body, their acts were
subsequently approved by the Presidium of the Soviet Union.

## Without Cultural Raiment

It may be amusing to fantasize about emperors
without their clothes. But there is nothing amusing about emperors, or, for that
matter, kings, or members of the House of Lords, or chambermaids, or even cocker
spaniels bereft of the cultural raiment which secures their places and provides
protection. Without his cultural apparel, every man is exposed. He is a
displaced person, even as the survivors of the Romanov family became displaced
persons during and after the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia.

The idea that has the world in its grip tends to make displaced persons of
everyone. It does so because it fuels the assault on culture, upon religion and
morality, upon civilization itself. As these are taken away, or lose their
vitality, men lose even the means by which they can defend themselves. In some
lands, the displacement has been dramatic and drastic. Refugees from these lands
now reside in new lands and seek to make places for themselves. In other lands,
the displacement is more gradual and has not yet assumed the guise of direct
brutality. The more thoroughly the idea is applied, however, the more the grip
will tighten.

The world is not, however, simply in the grip of a general idea. It is in the
grip of variations of the idea from land to land, as these have been shaped and
applied by a variety of leaders from different backgrounds. We must turn now to
particular developments of the idea.

*Next: 2. Marxism: Revolutionary Socialism.*

[^1_1]: Hedrick Smith, *The Russians* (New York: Quadrangle, 1976), pp. 9-10.

[^1_2]: Ibid., p. 255.

[^1_3]: Thomas Carlyle, *Sartor Resartus* (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1908), p. 46.

[^1_4]: Robert K. Massie, *Nicholas and Alexandra* (New York: Dell, 1967), p. 515.
