# World in the Grip of an Idea: 2. Marxism - Revolutionary Socialism

[Tuesday, February 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/february-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

"Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist consciousness, and
for the success of the cause itself, the alteration of men on a mass scale is
necessary, an alteration which can only take place in a practical movement, a
*revolution*; this revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the
*ruling* class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class
*overthrowing* it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the
muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.” — Karl Marx

The idea which has the world in its grip has two poles. One pole is the
revolutionary road to socialism; the other is the evolutionary road to
socialism. The idea—to achieve human felicity on this earth by concerting all
efforts toward its realization—is the same for both of them. Both poles, too,
operate to root out and destroy the received culture and use government as the
instrument that is supposed to move them toward the realization of their goal.
The basic difference is one of tactics, then, though tactics are no small matter
when they resolve into a question of whether persuasion or a shot in the back of
the neck is at issue, as it has sometimes been.

In any case, it is appropriate to begin the examination of particular approaches
to socialism with Marxism. Indeed, there are compelling reasons for beginning
with Marxism. One is that the world communist movement is traced to its source
in Marxism. The other is that all modern socialism comes into focus better when
seen from the angle of Marxism. It has been said that all of Western philosophy
is a series of footnotes to Plato. It can be said with equal validity that
modern socialism is a series of footnotes to Karl Marx.

## A Man of Contradictions

Why this should be so is a baffling question.
The facts of his life help hardly at all to explain it. Marx was certainly not a
leader of men. He was repelled by most people, even if they were not by him. He
championed the cause of the laborer (or industrial proletariat, as he chose to
call him), yet he was himself an intellectual. He proclaimed the importance of
action, yet he spent much of his life in libraries amidst the musty smell of
books. His ghost hovers over the thrust toward planned economies for nations and
empires, yet he was throughout his life incompetent to manage the financial
affairs of a household. Even his literary output fell short of his aims and the
expectations of those who provided financial aid. He is best known for *The
Communist Manifesto,* a rather short pamphlet which was the joint effort of
Marx and Friedrich Engels, and the one volume he completed of *Das Kapital.
*Most of his other writing was done in spurts, and consisted mainly of
critiques of other works at the time. There was much more of what was wrong with
the thinking of others than there was of straightforward development of his own
ideas.

The details of his life go further toward explaining why he may have held
certain beliefs than they do to accounting for why others were attracted by the
Marxian formulations. Marx was, for most of his adult life, a man without a
country, if country be taken to mean not only a nation but also religion,
culture, and sense of being a part of a received heritage. Marx's father and
mother had been Jewish, but his father became a Protestant in a predominantly
Catholic community, converted, it was said, to keep his government job. Karl
Marx was baptized a Christian but in early manhood became a militant atheist.
He attended universities at Bonn and Berlin, but presented his doctoral thesis
for his degree to the University of Jena, which he had never attended. He never
had what could be called regular employment but earned such income as he did
from writing and editorial work. Though he married and fathered several
children, the family lived from pillar to post, so to speak, as Marx sought
refuge first here, then there. He was frequently in trouble with the political
authorities for his revolutionary activity, seeking refuge in Paris, in
Brussels, and finally in London. Such friends as he had were fellow
revolutionaries, and, among revolutionaries, he got along only with those who
agreed with his version of things. His country, if he had one, was in his mind,
and that does help to explain his doctrines.

Even so, this alienated man, this man without a country, without traditional
religious underpinnings, with few possessions, with only a boiling animosity
toward his culture, who could be aroused to write only out of opposition, set
forth the doctrines which are today used to hold more than a billion people
under control. What brought this about? The answer is surely not to be found in
the details of his life. The answer, if it can be had, is in the doctrines. It
is in Marxism.

What is Marxism? One way to answer the question is to say that it is that body
of doctrines which was formulated by Karl Marx in collaboration with Friedrich
Engels in the course of both of their lives. (Engels outlived Marx by several
years and continued to expand upon the work that Marx had done.) Or, it can be
approached from the angle of its antecedents in German romanticism, Hegelianism,
the materialism of Feuerbach, the socialism of Proudhon, the anarchism of
Bakunin, and the whole complex of mid-nineteenth century radicalism which was
nipping and yapping at European society. Or, it can be traced forward in time
into Leninism, Stalinism, Titoism, Castroism, Maoism, and all the variants of it
that have been shaped by men attempting to apply it or apply some variety of it.

But any or all of these approaches would take us away from rather than toward
the core of Marxism. It is misleading, too, to treat Marxism as a system of
thought, though at some point it has to be done. It is certainly not a system of
thought by reason of fitting into the established categories for utilizing
reason and experience. Marx did not proceed deductively from self-evident
axioms. Nor did he proceed inductively to arrive at conclusions from the
assembled evidence. But his is not a system of thought.

If it were a system of thought, it could be tested and found to be true or
false. It could be held up against actuality and be refuted. Bertram D. Wolfe
has noted that Marxism "cannot be shaken by mere rational or factual refutation
of any number of its concrete propositions, even those that are central to its
logical structure."[^2_1] There may be several reasons for this, but a crucial one
has not been much emphasized. Marx is not talking about actuality, or what we
ordinarily call reality, in his basic propositions. It is difficult to refute
from actuality what bears no demonstrable relation to actuality.

## The Labor Theory of Value

Marx's mode of arriving at conclusions needs
to be illustrated by example to show that he was not operating in contact with
actuality. This may be done best by his labor theory of value, which is the
lynchpin of Marxism. Marx tells us, first, that the value of commodities is
determined by the amount of labor used in making them. He put it this way:
"*The relative values of commodities are, therefore, determined by the
respective quantities or amounts of labour, worked up, realised, fixed in
them."*[^2_2] But what is value? That was easy enough for Marx to answer. Price
"is a peculiar form assumed by value." Price, taken by itself, is nothing
but the monetary expression of value. He tells us, further, that,
on the average, *"the market price of a commodity coincides with its
value."*[^2_3]

*The novice might suppose, then, that the value of labor equals the value of
commodities produced by it. More, since price and value are, in effect, the
same, the price of labor would be the price of commodities. But Marx would not
have it as simple as that. He hastens to assure us that "there exists no such
thing as the* Value of Labour *in the common acceptance of the word."*[^2_4]
What the working man sells, he says, is not labor but *"Labouring Power."* "The
*value* of the labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour necessary
to maintain or reproduce it.... "[^2_5] There is another difficulty to be got
out of the way, too. It might be supposed from Marx's initial formulation that
the more work that went into a commodity the more it would be worth. Not at all,
says Marx, it is not labor *per se* that determines value, but the amount of
"*Social* labour" that goes into making the product.

It would be possible to follow Marx's analysis further, but perhaps it is not
necessary here. Marx claims and may even appear to be talking about the actual
world. He is not. Every key word and phrase he uses is loaded with his own
special meaning. It is true that he uses market price in the common
signification, but he makes clear that prices in the market are relative. All
his certainty is reserved for those concepts he has given a special meaning.
*Value* is not value—i.e., something which arises from our desires—; it is the
same thing as "natural price,"[^2_6] an idea borrowed from the classical
economists and dragged, one hopes, kicking and screaming into the discussion.
*Labour* is not labor; it is *Labouring Power.* That amount of labor which
determines the price of commodities is not just labor; it is *Social Labour.*

## His Word for It

How do we know that the value, or price (as in his
equation), of a commodity is determined by the amount of social labor in it? We
know it, if we know it, only because Marx has told us. There are no calculations
that can be performed to prove it. There is no way to add the amount of labor,
set it beside the price, and demonstrate that the one is equal to the other.
Moreover, even by his own formulation, that would not do it, for it is social
labor, not labor that can be summed up in hours and minutes, that he says equals
the value of commodities produced.

Is Marx's labor theory of value right or wrong? Let us put the difficulty of
answering this way. Marx only appeared to be talking about the actual world; he
was talking about his own vision of a world, a vision of a world that was, is,
and will be, but could be conceived only by a willful negation of the world that
was in 1865, when he spoke. The proof, if proof there would be, of Marx's
assertion lay in the future, not in the past. If Marx's labor theory of value
were a set of propositions about the actual world, it would be subject to
refutation. It was not.

The labor theory of value belongs to Marx's special Revelation, a revelation
vouchsafed to him and to all who have the will to believe it. The refutation of
Marx is accomplished by disbelief or, most likely, a strongly held set of
counter-beliefs, not by treating it as a coherent thought system.[^2_7] This
conclusion is buttressed by the tenacity of Marxists in the face of what appears
to non-Marxists to be the most convincing demonstrations from reason and
experience of its fallacies.

Marxism is an anti-religious religion. To see it in any other light is to miss
its character and appeal. A lifelong student of Marxism describes it this way:

> In an age prepared for by nearly two thousand years of Christianity with its
> millennial expectations, when the faith of millions has grown dim, and the
> altar seems vacant of its image, Marxism has arisen to offer a fresh,
> antireligious religion, a new faith, passionate and demanding, a new vision of
> the Last Things, a new Apocalypse, and a new Paradise.[^2_8]

It is commonly said that Marx stood the philosopher Hegel on his head. He did
much more than that. He stood Christianity on its head. Marx held that
Christianity was the perfecting of religion. It was, so to speak, the highest
religion, as religion, possible. Its perfection would, as in everything else for
Marx, result in its negation. Its negation was the flowing into Marxism of
Christian imagery, hopes, and longings with everything reversed: eternity
brought into time, spirit become matter, the Second Coming become Social
Revolution, the Incarnation become the proletariat, and communism become the
hope of redemption. The appeal of Marxism, then, is not only that it is an
anti-religious religion but also that it is an anti-Christian christianity.

## The End of Philosophy

Marxism is also an anti-philosophy philosophy.  The reign of philosophy ended
with Hegel, for whom philosophy became history as idea became actuality. Marx
substituted matter for idea, which made philosophy even more a dead letter.
Western philosophy has been dualistic following the insights of Plato. Marx
propounded a dualism which would end finally in the destruction of one of the
duo—the bourgeoisie—and with the triumph of communism an end to history as well.
For Marxism, everything is finally being reduced to one. All the elements which
have been developed and discerned will move finally to their resolution in one
element.<br> <br> Karl Marx was a poet and a prophet, a poor poet and false
prophet, no doubt, but poet and prophet nonetheless. Not nearly enough has been
made of the poetic flavor of Marx's writing. This is not surprising, for few
undertakings are so remote from poetry as economics, particularly the ponderous
variety of economics constructed by Marx. Yet, many of the Marxian formulations
are best grasped as the work of a poet. Take the following, for example:

> The task of history, once the world beyond truth has disappeared, is to
> establish the truth of this world. The immediate task of philosophy which is
> at the service of history, once the saintly form of human self-alienation has
> been unmasked, is to unmask self-alienation in its unholy forms. Thus the
> criticism of heaven turns into the criticism of the earth, the criticism of
> religion into the criticism of right, and the criticism of theology into the
> criticism of politics.[^2_9]

Whether this passage can be construed so as to make sense of it is a question
that can be left to the side.

My point is that if it could be it would have to be construed, much in the
manner of an obscure poem. What is "the world beyond truth," or "the truth of
this world," or "the saintly form of human self-alienation," or "the criticism
of heaven"? Considered as prose, the whole passage is nonsense. Considered as
poetry, what sense it contains can be discerned by consulting the Marxian
framework. (Poetry has been traditionally construed by the knowledge of certain
conventional allusions. Marx's phrases are construed by reference to his
disillusions.)[^2_10]

## A Prophet of History

Marx was a prophet, too, not a prophet of God, of course, but a prophet of
History. He was the John the Baptist of communism, traveling hither and yon to
proclaim the imminent coming of the Revolution.

Marxism is foremost, and finally, an ideology. To Marx, an ideology was a
complex of ideas and beliefs arising out of class arrangements which served as
rationalization and justification for the ruling class. But those not under his
sway have quite a different view of the matter. Ideology is understood today to
mean any complex of ideas and beliefs in terms of which things are explained and
understood. Marxism, as a phenomenon, gives added precision to the term.

Marxism is a self-contained set of notions which reduces reality to the
dimensions of Marx's vision of history. It explains what has been, is, and will
be by way of these propositions. It is a figment of the minds of Marx and his
interpreters. All Marxian thought, so called, is an unraveling of propositions
found in the ideology. Before Marx, thought was determined by material
conditions, Marx thought; after Marx, such thought as is done is to be
determined by and kept within the lineaments of the ideology. This last is not
what Marx said, but it follows from the revealed nature of the ideology.

Everywhere Marx looked he saw paradox, contradiction, struggle, and eventual
destruction. A vast and interlinked disharmony prevailed everywhere, a
disharmony that was fated to continue and worsen until that should eventually
occur which would bring an end to it and produce harmony and unity. The key
concepts of the Marxian ideology are these: *alienation, class struggle,
industrial proletariat, bourgeoisie, labor theory of value, capitalism, social
revolution, socialism,* and *communism.*

There is a brilliance within Marxian ideology which what has been said thus far
might not indicate. It should not be denied, however. Marx was an intellectual
scavenger, taking in vast quantities of literature by his voluminous reading,
opposing the particulars of almost every formulation he encountered, then
subjecting all to his own particular turn of mind before he appeared in print
with the result. He defined his position in opposition to what he read, but he
also incorporated much of what he read into his position. Whether the
brilliance comes mainly from what he incorporated or from what he originated is
a question that here can be left open. That the brilliance is there should,
however, be acknowledged. Unfortunately, he had a tendency to vulgarize.

This was so in the case of his theory of alienation. The Marxian theory of
alienation was most fully developed in his earlier writings, and there is some
tendency to discount it because some of these were not published until long
after his death. Even so, it is crucial to his whole ideology. The theory can be
stated in some such fashion as this. Man as we know him is not real, essential
man. His reason is flawed. What he experiences is distorted by ideology. He is
not free but is rather imprisoned by circumstances and conditions over which he
has no control.

## Sources of Alienation

The sources of this condition are what might be called mechanical conditions by
which he is alienated.

He is alienated from himself, first of all, by religion. Religion subjects him
to the mediating powers of others. He is alienated from himself by private
property. Property sets him at odds with others and alienates him from his
social nature. He is alienated from himself by the state. The state is an
artificial creature which arises from division into classes in society. It is an
instrument of class rule. He is alienated from the product of his labor by its
appropriation by the capitalist. This alienation is apparently exacerbated, too,
by the division of labor.

This theory of alienation is usually known in its most vulgar form, i.e., in the
alienation of the wage earner from the product of his labor. This is so, mainly,
because Marx and Engels placed the greatest emphasis upon it by elaborating it
so much. Here is a fairly typical expression of the alienation of the worker
theory:

> The alienation of the worker in his object is expressed as follows in the laws
> of political economy: the more the worker produces the less he has to consume;
> the more value he creates the more worthless he becomes; the more refined his
> product the more crude and misshapen the worker; the more civilized the
> product the more barbarous the worker....[^2_11]

The concept was vulgarized (vastly oversimplified, anyhow) by bringing it all to
bear on the alienation of the worker.

In any case, it was alienation which made revolution necessary for Marx. Marx
was certainly aware that during his lifetime governments were taking various
measures intended to ameliorate the lot of the worker. Why might socialism not
be achieved by gradual degrees in an evolutionary fashion? Marx sometimes
wavered on the matter, but he returned again and again to the position that
revolution will be necessary. It will be necessary because alienation is too
broadly and deeply established. The Gordian knot of alienation must be broken,
and revolution is the means by which he thought this could be accomplished.
Revolution, presumably, would shatter the bonds forged by alienation.

## Class Warfare

What Marx meant by revolution, as what he meant by anything else in his special
language, is colored by ideology, refracted through his special vision, and
given a special meaning. One thing he meant was a conflict in which the
industrial proletariat should triumph over the bourgeoisie. Marx and Engels put
it this way:

> The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all the other
> proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of
> the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of the political power by the
> proletariat.[^2_12]

The revolution must proceed, however, to become a social revolution:

> But while a social revolution with a political soul is either a paraphrase or
> a meaningless expression, a political revolution with a social soul is a
> meaningful phrase. The revolution in general... is a political act...
> However, when the organizing activity of socialism begins and when its own
> aims, its soul comes to the fore, socialism abandons its political
> cloak.[^2_13]

The important thing here is that as a result of the revolution everything,
everything, is to be altered and changed:

> The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare
> that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing
> social conditions.[^2_14]

Everything is to be transformed:

> Communism is the positive abolition of private property and thus of human
> self-alienation and therefore the real appropriation of the human essence by
> and for man. This is communism as the complete and conscious return of man....
> It is the genuine resolution of the antagonism between man and nature and
> between man and man. It is the true resolution of the struggle between
> existence and essence, between objectification and Self-affirmation, between
> freedom and necessity, between individual and species...[^2_15]

All existing relations must be abolished—destroyed—so that social man may
emerge:

> Religion, family, state, law, morality, science and art are only particular
> forms of production and fall under its general law. The positive abolition of
> private property and the appropriation of human life is therefore the positive
> abolition of all alienation, thus the return of man out of religion, family,
> state, etc., into his human, i.e. social, being.[^2_16]

Marx apparently realized that such a revolution would not be completed swiftly.
He said that the working class "will have to pass through long struggles,
through a series of historic processes, transforming circumstances and
men."[^2_17]

The remainder of the Marxian formulations have to do mainly with establishing
"scientifically" that the revolution is inevitable. The labor theory of value
was the lynchpin of this demonstration. If Marx was right in this theory, the
laboring man was being robbed of the fruits of his labor. Moreover, he claimed
that the more capital that was accumulated, invested, and concentrated, the more
deplorable would be the plight of the industrial worker. More and more people
would fall into this class; in numbers it would constitute the majority of
people in a country. When the situation of the working class became sufficiently
desperate, its numbers so overwhelming, it would revolt and throw over the
ruling class. All of history had been a series of class struggles. The stage was
being set, Marx proclaimed, for the final class struggle, the class struggle to
end all class struggles, the class struggle between the proletariat and
bourgeoisie.

## In-Built Tyranny

It is often alleged that the tyranny of communism in practice is the result of
some sort of aberration from Marxism, or from Leninism, or is the result of a
historical residue of Oriental Despotism in certain lands, or whatever. On the
contrary, the tyranny is implicit in the ideology. The tyranny of communism is
so essentially a part of Marxism that if a committee of Albert Schweitzers were
assembled to put it into operation in some land they could only proceed by
becoming tyrants. A review of the essentials of Marxism should demonstrate why
this is so.

The engine of Marxism is hatred, hatred for everything as it is, hatred of
religion, hatred of the family, hatred of the division of labor, hatred of the
state, hatred of capitalists, hatred of property, hatred of the "rural idiocy"
(as Marx put it) of farmers, and, yes, hatred of industrial workers.[^2_18] The
proletariat who would triumph and be transformed into true man was not, of
course, the industrial worker whom we actually encounter. He must be the class
conscious industrial worker, i.e., a worker become Marxist in his conceptions.
Above all, Marxism is a hatred of the past, everything shaped out of it,
everything drawn from it, which is to say, just about everything. Marxism is a
hatred of all imperfection, and everything that is, is imperfect. In short,
Marxism hates man as he is and has been.

The *modus operandi* of Marxism is destruction. That is the true meaning of
Marxian revolution. It is no simple seizure of political power. It might better
be conceived as a cataclysmic earthquake, followed by devastating tremor after
devastating tremor until every relationship that was has been sundered. All the
actuality that has been accumulated through the ages must be destroyed—property
relationships, religious belief, family ties, legal forms, the intellectual
heritage, culture and civilization itself. How else, but by tyranny, can such a
destruction be wrought?

Tyranny is embedded in the very framework of Marxism. What is history for Marx
but a tyrant? The course of history is determined, according to him; it has a
direction which is beyond our control. Such history is not guide, but dictator,
so to speak. More, "History is the judge—its executioner, the
proletarian."[^2_19] Of course, the executioner and tyrant is not the whole body
of the proletariat; it is to be carried out by the class conscious wing. No
clearer prescription for tyranny has been contrived.

On the other side of the divide, of course, Marx tells us that all this will
end. The class struggle will end with the victory of the proletariat. With this
victory, too, history will end. The state will be no more; it will wither away.
The dictatorship of the proletariat will have ended because its work will be
done. Man will no longer be separated from man; he will have become completely
social. He will become pure man, so to speak, with all his energies released and
himself integrated. Even the rift between man and nature will be healed.

## Appeal to Passions

The appeal of Marxism lies in the fact that it justifies and sanctifies the
release of the demonic urges in each of us. It justifies and sanctifies hate,
envy, the love of power, the bent to destruction, the desire to set everything
right (particularly, others), and all the vague and unfulfilled longings of man.
It offers to the believer union with the forces of history, an end to his
separateness, and the assurance of final victory which is inevitable. It offers,
too, an end of struggle, that struggle which has been man's lot throughout
history. Its deepest appeal has always been to intellectuals, to those men who
sit on the fringes of society with their ideas.  It holds out to them the hope
and expectation that their ideas can at last become actuality.

The reality of communist practice proceeds directly from Marxian theory. The
revolutionary road to socialism was staked out by Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels. The proof of this must be sought in the communist practice. But first,
there is another road to socialism, the evolutionary road. That, too, draws
sustenance from Marxism. Marx is even supposed to have suggested late in life
that in some lands revolution might not be necessary. In the report of a speech
in 1872, he is supposed to have said:

> We know that one has to take into account the institutions, customs and
> traditions of various countries, and we do not deny that there are certain
> countries, such as America and England, to which if I were better acquainted
> with your institutions, I would also add Holland, where the workers can attain
> their goal by peaceful means....[^2_20]

But evolutionary socialism has its own ideology, and it needs to be examined on
its own grounds.

Next: *3. Evolutionary Socialism*

[^2_1]: 'Bertram D. Wolfe, *Marxism* (New York: Dial, 1965), p. 361.

[^2_2]: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works* (New York:
  International Publishers, 1968), p. 204.

[^2_3]: *Ibid.,* p. 207.

[^2_4]: *Ibid.,* p. 209.

[^2_5]: *Ibid.,* p. 212.

[^2_6]: *Ibid.,* p. 208.

[^2_7]: This is not to belittle the achievement of the Austrian School in their
  effort to refute Marx. Their achievement, however, is accomplished by denying
  the validity of Marx's concept of value. That is to say, their refutation
  depends on abandoning his framework.

[^2_8]: Wolfe, *op. cit.,* p. 369.

[^2_9]: Quoted in Thomas Molnar, *The Decline of the Intellectual* (New York:
  Meridian, 1961), p. 90.

[^2_10]: Marx wrote a goodly amount of verse in his youth, and even retained an
  interest in poetry after he became a revolutionary. See David McLellan, *Karl
  Marx: His Life and Thought* (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1973), pp.  20-25,
  103-04. Engels was said to have been something of a poet, too.

[^2_11]: Z.A. Jordan, ed., *Karl Marx: Economy, Class and Society* (New York:
  Scribner's, 1971), pp. 126-27.

[^2_12]: *Ibid.,* p. 299.

[^2_13]: *Ibid.,* p. 283.

[^2_14]: *Ibid.,* p. 292.

[^2_15]: Quoted in McLellan, *op. cit.,* p. 118.

[^2_16]: *Ibid.,* p. 119.

[^2_17]: Jordan,* op. cit., *p. 301.

[^2_18]: See Wolfe, *op. cit.,* p. 198.

[^2_19]: Jordan, *op. cit.,* p. 292.

[^2_20]: *Ibid* ., p. 294.

