# World in the Grip of An Idea: 3. Evolutionary Socialism

[Tuesday, March 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/march-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

The appeal of Marxism to intellectuals has been oft noted. A part of the reason
for this is no particular mystery. Marxism holds out to the intellectual the
hope of escape from one of his most persistent frustrations. An intellectual is,
by definition, one who is devoted to ideas, their formulation and exposition.
But ideas are only completed or fulfilled when they are put into practice. At
least this is so for some ideas, particularly those having to do with social
change. Therein, however, lies the source of frustration for modern
intellectuals, as their tribe has become more numerous and their ideas become so
plentiful: they are often denied any impact on society. Their ideas lie dormant;
they fill the pages of books but do not go into practice.

Karl Marx projected a vision of a dramatic ending of this state of affairs. The
history of ideas, to Marx, was really a history of ideologies. These ideologies
arose as rationalizations of class positions. The ideas were necessarily
disjoined from reality as the thinkers were alienated from their own natures by
class arrangements and conflicts. Come the revolution, he claimed, the
alienation would end, and ideas would become actuality. With the destruction of
classes, man's alienation from his nature would end, and he could experience
reality directly, no longer needing to view it through the distorted lenses of
ideas. "Philosophy turns into the world of reality," he said.[^3_1] The
frustration of the intellectual would presumably end, for he would no longer
have a conception of a world different from the world he would be experiencing.

Unfortunately, or, fortunately, if one prefers, the end of ideology with the
revolution entails, logically, an end to the function of the intellectual, as
Thomas Molnar has pointed out in *The Decline of the Intellectual.* When
everyone perceives reality clearly and directly, there is no need for a special
corps of interpreters. When idea has become actuality, there is no occasion for
the contentions of intellectuals. Many intellectuals in communist lands
neglected to figure this out, and some of them did not live to regret it.

## Man Needs a Purpose

There is a deeper reason for the appeal of Marxism to intellectuals; else, one
suspects, it would never have gained the hold that it has had. It is that man
needs an explanation of the world in which he lives.  He wants to know where it
came from and where it is going. Above all, he needs a purpose in life, a
purpose which goes beyond himself but with which he can identify and find
meaning. He needs, in a word, religion. But many intellectuals cut themselves
loose from the traditional religions in the modern era. They either ignored
religion or became agnostics or atheists, quite often of the most militant
variety. Marxism supplied for them the place that religion has usually held for
most men.

Marxism, as was earlier noted, is an anti-religious religion. It is an
earthbound, materialistic, man centered, cataclysmic, prophetic, and dogmatic
religion. Dialectical materialism is its revelation. History is its god. Marx is
its prophet. Lenin is its incarnation. The revolution is its day of judgment.
And communism is its paradise.

Its claim to being scientific even satisfies the intellectual's desire to have a
rational religion.

Of course, Marxism is not scientific; neither the economic analysis nor the
historical prediction can pass muster as science. They are a compound of special
pleading, wishful thinking, and carefully chosen abstractions. But it should not
be supposed that the appeal of Marxism would be enhanced if it were a science.
On the contrary, if it were a science, it would only be a dismal science. The
appeal of Marxism lies in its paradoxes, its contradictions, in the very fact
that to believe it requires an act of faith, as does any religion. The
intellectual of the appropriate temperament finds in the Marxist religion hope
for the hopeless, meaning in history, the promised resolution of all conflict,
and the expectation of union, even communion, with all men.

## The Religion of Socialism

Marxism is, then, the religion of socialism. Many, many intellectuals have been,
and are, attracted to this anti-religious religion called communism. Indeed,
most socialists identify in some ways with it.  Perhaps, they see in it the
church to which they would belong had they only undergone the necessary
experience of conversion. Most likely, they see in it a common undertaking like
their own, only one which uses methods and tactics which they cannot approve. In
any case, many of those attracted by it have not become communists. They have,
for whatever reasons, turned to other varieties of socialism.

It might be more appropriate to say that they turned to the other *variety* of
socialism, because for the purposes of this work all socialism is being
classified as either revolutionary socialism or evolutionary socialism. It is
tempting to deal with the other socialism as watered down Marxism. There is some
substance to this view. Certainly, when any other approach to socialism is
compared with the revolutionary approach it pales beside it. More, the man who
gave currency to the phrase, "evolutionary socialism," Eduard Bernstein, is
usually classified as a revisionist Marxist.

It is, however, a temptation which should be resisted. Marxism is not the root
of socialism; it is only the most virulent branch. Even German Social Democracy,
in which both Marx and Bernstein can best be understood, was greatly influenced
by Marx's contemporary, Ferdinand Lassalle. The English Fabians were probably as
much influenced by Henry George, say, as by Marx. Guild socialism in France had
yet other origins. In the United States, there were Native American socialists
who gave to American socialism its own national flavor. Indeed, one of the
distinctions between Marxism and evolutionary socialism is that the latter is
almost invariably national socialism while the former claims to be, and in
certain senses is, international.

## Subtle Differences

It may be most helpful to think of both socialisms as belonging to the same
family but being different species. Undoubtedly, they share common traits as do
members of a biological family. But they are sufficiently different from one
another to be thought of as different species.  The basic idea from which they
spring is the same, but the articulation of it is distinctly different. It is so
different that the two do not merge without becoming the one or the other. To be
more exact, an evolutionary socialist may approve a revolution somewhere or
other, but he does not thereby become himself a revolutionist. In like manner, a
revolutionary socialist may approve, even work to bring about, some government
intervention, but remain, all the while, a convinced revolutionist. Those of us
who are not socialists may find such distinctions difficult to grasp, but,
hopefully, they will become clearer with some exposition.

One major difference between the two is in the matter of religion.
Marxism—revolutionary socialism—is a religion of sorts. Evolutionary socialism
is not. That is not to say that there are not articles of faith and things which
one believes if he is a socialist. There are. It is rather that they are not
religious in character. Nor should it be thought that socialist belief is less
tenacious because it is not religious. My impression is that it may well be more
so. The beliefs in evolutionary socialism are often acquired in the same manner
as are customs, habits, and traditions. (All socialisms are anti-traditional in
the deepest sense, of course, but it is the method of evolutionary socialism to
operate within the inherited framework even as it is being altered.) They have
the staying power of traditions once they are acquired.

## Gradualism, Democratism, and Statism

There are three main elements in evolutionary socialist tactics. All three
distinguish them from Marxism in theory, and at least two of them are real
differences. They are: *gradualism, democracy* or *democratism,* and *statism*.

Gradualism has several meanings and functions within evolutionary socialism. At
the most obvious level, it defines a difference between it and communism.
Socialism is to be arrived at gradually, step by step, rather than as a
transformation wrought by revolution. Another aspect of it is contained in the
Fabian doctrine of permeation. As Sidney Webb described it, the policy of
permeation was one of inculcating:

*socialist thought and socialist projects into the minds not merely of complete
converts, but of those whom we found in disagreement with us—and we spared no
pains in these propagandist efforts, not among political liberals or radicals
only, but also among political conservatives; not only among trade unionists and
co-operators, but also among employers and financiers ....*[^3_2]

Gradualism was closely tied in with the theories of geological and biological
evolution which were gaining currency at the same time as these socialist ideas.
Marx had declared that the condition of the proletariat would continue to
deteriorate, or, more precisely, that more and more people would be reduced to
the proletarian condition. More and more wealth would be concentrated in fewer
and fewer hands. This would continue to the point at which it became
intolerable. At this catastrophic point, the time would be ripe for revolution.
The great change could only be effected by something like a revolutionary
overthrow of the old system and the grasping of power by the proletariat. The
theory of evolution was useful to Marx, too, for it could be used to support the
idea that fundamental and basic changes could occur in human nature. But his
revolutionary idea was tied to the notion of catastrophic rather than gradual
change.

The gradualists, on the other hand, believed that conditions, particularly in
advanced industrial countries, were already moving gradually toward a socialist
conclusion. Bernstein put it this way:

*In all advanced countries we see the privileges of the capitalist bourgeoisie
yielding step by step to democratic organisations. Under the influence of this,
and driven by the movement of the working classes which is daily becoming
stronger, a social reaction has set in against the exploiting tendencies of
capital, a counteraction which, although it still proceeds timidly and feebly,
yet does exist, and is always drawing more departments of economic life under
its influence. Factory legislation, the democratising of local government, and
the extension of its area of work, the freeing of trade unions and systems of
co-operative trading from legal restrictions, the consideration of standard
conditions of labour in the work undertaken by public authorities—all these
characterise this phase of the evolution.*[^3_3]

## Fabian Gradualism

The Fabians were given to emphasizing that the change taking place was not
simply a result of changes in political power. It was, they claimed, inherent in
the industrial system. One of the Fabian *Essays* described the process this
way:

The factory system, the machine industry, the world commerce, have abolished
individualist production; and the completion of the co-operative form towards
which the transition stage of individualist capitalism is hurrying us, will
render a conformity with social ethics, a universal condition of tolerable
existence for the individual.[^3_4]

In short, the gradualists claimed that the direction of industrial, social, and
political evolution was already toward their desired goal of socialism. How this
differed from the Marxian view was well stated by Eduard Bernstein:

*The old vision of the social collapse which rises before us as a result of
Marx's arguments … is the picture of an army. It presses forward, through
detours, over sticks and stones, but is constantly led downward in its march
ahead. Finally it arrives at a great abyss. Beyond it there stands beckoning the
desired goal—the state of the future, which can be reached only through a sea; a
red sea, as some have said. Now, this vision changes, and another takes its
place …. This vision shows us the way of the working classes not only forward,
but at the same time upward. Not only do the workers grow in numbers, but their
economic, ethical, and political level rises as well....*[^3_5]

The link was made, then, between the gradual movement toward socialism and the
idea of evolutionary progress. One might say, following this junction, that
socialism was the goal, gradualism the way, and evolutionary progress the engine
to get there. It has certainly been a most useful propellant. The idea of
progress has been mightily attractive in the last couple of centuries. Many have
come to believe that great progress was actually taking place. If it was, why it
had anything to do with socialism is an important question. But gradualists
propounded it not as a proposition standing in need of proof but as the answer
to the riddle of history. The notion that the movement toward socialism is
progress has served them well. It has enabled them to claim that all acts moving
in their direction were progressive, while those opposing them were
retrogressive and reactionary.

## Practical Democracy

When evolutionary socialists say that they are democratic it does not mean just
what it appears to mean. To get in the vicinity of its meaning it is necessary
to hark back to one of the issues that split German socialists in the middle of
the nineteenth century. The issue was this: Should socialists run for and accept
seats in legislatures? More broadly: Should socialists participate in bourgeois
governments? To put it in present day jargon: Should socialists participate in
the system? By participating in it would they not be giving tacit approval to
it? Revolutionists tended to answer that they would. The state—and most
emphatically, the bourgeois state — was the enemy. Those who took the other side
were early called democratic socialists.  They were also called
parliamentarists, signifying their willingness to participate in the government.

Actually, evolutionary socialists are what is now often referred to as
pragmatic. What this means in socialist terms is that they are not wedded to any
particular means in the achievement of power and the enactment of their
policies. Hence, democracy may mean for them majority rule when they have a
majority. On the other hand, it may mean equality when they are pressing for the
enfranchisement of someone or for the use of some other than a parliamentary
device for the achievement of their ends. Even the form which socialism will
eventually assume, indeed, whether it will have some *final* form, does not much
matter. Eduard Bernstein got in hot water with other socialists when he first
tried to express this view. He had said that the "final aim" of socialism was of
little account. Here is his further explanation of what he meant:

> In this sense I wrote the sentence that the movement means everything for me
> and that what is usually called "the final aim of socialism" is nothing....
> Even if the word "usually" had not shown that the proposition was only to be
> understood conditionally, it was obvious that it could not express
> indifference concerning the final carrying out of socialist principles, but
> only indifference—or, as it would be better expressed, carelessness—as to the
> form of the final arrangement of things.[^3_6]

## The Goal Is Everything

What was shocking about Bernstein's original statement was that he appeared to
have got the matter wrong end to. What he should have said, one supposes, is
that the means did not matter but that the end or final goal of socialism was
everything.  Yet, when pressed on it, he did not back off; he affirmed his
devotion to principles, not to goals. Actually, he changed positions. He had
said that "the movement means everything," not that principles do. His original
meaning may have been closer to the core of evolutionary socialism. He was
saying, if I understand him, that what the paradise of socialism is like does
not matter so long as we are on the way there. It is in the concerting of effort
to achieve it that the fruits of socialism are realized, not in some distant
goal to be reached.

Despite any appearance to the contrary, what comes out of this is that methods
do not matter so long as they are collectivist in principle. What he was arguing
for was the necessity of political activity as the necessary immediate task of
socialists. What he was arguing against was that to become embroiled in politics
was the wrong way to achieve socialism, that the political means were not in
accord with the final goal of socialism. He was arguing against those who were
arguing from some blueprint of what socialism was going to be like. He had no
such blueprint, he was saying, and he would not be turned away from using
methods that were collectivist by some hypothetical final goal.

Does this mean that evolutionary socialists are democratic in principle? A
biographer of Bernstein has summed up his mature position this way:

> Social democracy fights for democracy in state, province, and community as a
> means of realizing political equality for all and as a lever for the
> socialization of the soil and of capitalist enterprises. It is not the
> workers' party in the sense that it accepts only workers as members—everyone
> who subscribes to its principles may belong to it. But its chief appeal is to
> the workers, for the liberation of the workers must principally be the task of
> the workers themselves. The chief job of Social Democracy is to fill the
> working class with this idea and to organize it economically and politically
> for its historic fight.[^3_7]

Sidney Webb described the connection between socialism and democracy in these
words:

> So long … as democracy in political administration continues to be the
> dominant principle, socialism may be quite safely predicted as its economic
> obverse,in spite of those freaks and aberrations of democracy which have
> already here and there thrown up a short-lived monarchy or a romantic
> dictatorship. Every increase in the political power of the proletariat will
> most surely be used by them for their economic and social protection....[^3_8]

Actually, it would be more accurate to say that collectivism was the principle
and democracy the means. Democracy offered the mode for collective decision
making. More, it provided a means for thrusting toward enfranchising more and
more of the population. With near universal suffrage, they hoped that socialist
measures would be ever more likely to be enacted. Democracy became a mystique in
the course of this effort, a mystique of the proper way to act and even a sort
of mystical goal.

## Reliance on State Power

Evolutionary socialism is statist. It determinedly uses the power of government
for its purposes. On the face of it, however, this does not distinguish
evolutionary from revolutionary socialism.  The difference, such as it is, is
part theoretical and part the role that government is supposed to play and how
it is to be done. In theory, Marxists are not statists. The State, according to
Marx, was supposed to wither away under communism. This, however, depended upon
a transformation of human beings and society which has not taken place. That
aside, there are still differences between revolutionary and evolutionary
socialism.

The evolutionists proposed to use the existing state and work within it. They
would gradually transform the state even as men and society were being
transformed. By contrast, revolutionists proposed that the old state structure
would have to be destroyed and a new one erected in its place.

Evolutionary socialists have been *interventionists.* They proposed to work and
accomplish their ends, in part at least, by intervening in the capitalist
system, as they described it. They would eventually alter and transform the
economic structure by their interventions. The revolutionaries were holistic in
their approach. They would take over the state apparatus, change it and redirect
it so that it was no longer what it had been. They would use it not simply to
alter the economy step by step but would destroy the old system and put another
one in its place. Both are no doubt statist, at least to those who do not accept
the mysteries of communist terminology, but there are differences in approaches.

There is no blinking the fact that evolutionary socialism differs somewhat and
bears a different face from land to land. It has already been pointed out that
by its nature it is nationalistic. It is even called by different names in
different countries. In Germany, it is the Social Democratic Party today, though
most political parties are apt to be to some extent under its sway. In England,
the Labour Party has been the spearhead of evolutionary socialism. In some
lands, it is the Christian Socialist parties. In the United States, its devotees
are most often referred to as "liberals," but they have also been known by other
names. The Democratic Party in more recent times has been at the forefront in
pushing the gradualist type of reforms.

## The Strategy Changes

The tactics of socialists differ much from country to country. In those nations
where socialism is avowed as a desirable goal, it is sometimes sufficient
recommendation for measures that they are required by socialism. But in
countries, such as the United States, where few of the actual advocates avow
their socialism, and where it would hardly be considered a recommendation,
measures are promoted on other grounds.

The amazing thing is the continuing impetus toward socialism and the remarkable
consistency in what is sought from land to land. Despite even the most obvious
failures, despite political setbacks from time to time, despite cultural
differences from land to land, the impetus rises again and again and the same
sorts of measures continue to be enacted.

The question must ever arise as to where and what is the source of this impetus
and consistency. The impetus to and consistency of communism is not so difficult
to explain. After all, communism is an international movement, supported by
nations where communist parties are in power, such as the Soviet Union, the
People's Republic of China, and Cuba. There is a party line controlled from
Moscow, Peking, or wherever. Communism is spread, too, by military conquest. But
the paraphernalia for this is missing largely from evolutionary socialism. There
is no body with either the power or authority to promulgate a party line across
the boundaries of nations. Even within countries, there is usually no
authoritative body to enforce some party line. True, the United States, or
perchance other nations, may promote socialist measures through foreign aid
programs, but these would hardly account for the continuing impetus toward
socialism. The notion that it is done by some international cabal is appealing,
but such organizations as exist lack the power and authority to promote
socialism that thoroughly.

The answer, as we have explored it thus far, is this. The world is in the grip
of an idea. The idea is to use government to achieve human felicity on this
earth by concerting all efforts toward its realization and to root out and
destroy all that stands in the way. The idea, in its Marxist articulation, is an
anti-religious religion. The idea, in its gradualist posture is a secular faith.
It is not proclaimed by the gradualists as being either secular or a faith. It
is not a religion. It accepts votaries from every religion and none, lays claim
to any good which it finds in these religions, and uses the elements of
traditional religious belief which bear any resemblance to the idea to support
it. Its faith is in progress, in collectivist democracy, in the possibility of
changing human nature, and in eventually concerting all efforts behind the
movement to achieve human felicity on this earth.

## Long-Range Planning

The Marxists offer to the intellectuals the hope that ideas will become
actuality. The evolutionary socialists offer not just temporary employment to
intellectuals but permanent positions. Since the evolution is an extremely long
range affair, there is no probability that in the foreseeable future the need
for ideas will end. To the have-nots, to the down-and-out, to any who conceive
that they have not received their deserts (and the number of these is legion)
both revolutionary and evolutionary socialism promise that all this will be
changed. Both hold up a vision of perfection beside the realities of an
imperfect world and proclaim that they know how to attain the perfection. If
history is *for* them (either history whose process was supposedly
scientifically discerned by Marx, or history discerned in progressive
evolutionary patterns), who can be against them? These are the lineaments of a
religion, on the one hand, and of a secular faith, on the other.

My main purpose in this work, however, is not to write about ideas. The emphasis
is to be on the *grip,* not upon the idea. To show the grip, it is necessary to
look at the actions of governments in some of the lands under the sway of the
socialist ideas. There we shall discover not the beatific vision foretold by
socialist prophets but the hard realities produced by the applications of force
and violence.

## From Ideas to Practice

The discussion of the ideas of revolutionary and evolutionary socialism has one
main purpose here. It is to show the connection between the ideas and the
practices. Socialists of whatever persuasion focus attention upon and talk most
about economic matters. They proclaim that the ills which beset us are economic
in origin. But the task which they propose to undertake does not simply involve
rearranging economies. An economy does not exist in lofty isolation from man,
society, morality, religion, culture, habits, customs, and traditions.

Indeed, economy is what it is because man is what he is. This being so, anyone
attempting to institute new and different economic arrangements must perforce
also devise a new man, new society, new morality, and so on. It may be less
painful to go about it gradually than in one fell swoop, but the damage must
finally be done whichever way is taken. The damage must be done because the old
man, the old society, the old morality, and so on, must be rooted out, altered,
or destroyed. The evolutionary approach is much more subtle because much of this
process is hidden beneath diversionary arguments and gradual methods. It is
there, nonetheless.

## Loss of Independence

The impact of the thrust toward socialism is to destroy the independence of the
individual and leave him exposed to the power of government and the influence of
whoever has it or will wield it. This is so because the thrust of socialism is
to remove all the supports by which he may stand as an individual: the supports
of a free society, of morality, of religion, of custom and tradition. The logic
of this development is in the socialist idea.

We turn now to the exploration of this impact in several lands where it has been
applied. Undoubtedly, the impact will vary from country to country. It will
certainly vary depending upon whether it is revolutionary or evolutionary
socialism at work. It will vary, too, depending upon the leaders from time to
time and place to place. Each country has a different history, and each people
different ways. But when all that has been said, there is but one definitive way
to study the impact of an idea, and A Strange Hybrid that is upon actual people
in the situations in which we find them.

*Next: 4. Russia: Old Regime and New Revolutionaries.*

[^3_1]: Quoted in Thomas Molnar, *The Decline of the Intellectual* (Cleveland:
  World Publishing Co., 1961), p. 81.

[^3_2]: Harry W. Laidler, *History of Socialism* (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell,
  1968), pp. 220-21.

[^3_3]: Eugen Weber, ed. *The Western Tradition* (Boston: D.C. Heath, 1959), p.
  663.

[^3_4]: Laidler, *op. cit.,* p. 212.

[^3_5]: Quoted in Peter Gay, *The Dilemma of Democratic Socialism* (New York:
  Collier, 1962), pp. 147-48.

[^3_6]: Weber, *op. cit.,* pp. 664-65.

[^3_7]: Gay, *op. cit.,* pp. 251-52.

[^3_8]: Laidler, *op. cit.,* p. 199.&nbsp;

