# World in the Grip of an Idea: 5. Russia - The Revolution Commences

[Sunday, May 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/may-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

What was the Bolshevik Revolution?

This became a momentous question as soon as the Bolsheviks seized power in
Russia in the fall of 1917. It was at the outset a pressing question for those
people within the Russian Empire who fell under the sway of the Bolsheviks (who
proceeded shortly to change their name to Communist). The question has not
diminished over the years but has rather gained in importance as communism has
spread over the world. There are now at least 19 countries containing over a
billion souls now under the power of communist parties. The revolutions going on
in these lands are mostly patterned after the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. To
know the Bolshevik Revolution and its extended aftermath, then, would be to know
much about communist revolution.

The Bolshevik Revolution—and all communist revolutions—must be examined at every
stage from two different and often irreconcilable angles. One is the angle of
ideology. This angle entails the Marxian mythology with its overlay of Leninism
and whatever other interpretations may be involved. It contains its own peculiar
language, its vision of history, its heroes and villains. The other angle is the
reality of what is actually happening. The ideology can be understood, so long
as it is kept in a separate compartment. So, too, we may suppose that we
understand the reality apart from the ideology.

This latter point must be denied, however. This approach leads to continual
misunderstanding of communism. Those who persist in viewing communism this way
will interpret the acts of the leaders in such terms as the quest for power,
expansionism, and other such historically familiar motives. It is not that
communist leaders may not be moved by such aims; it is rather that their aims
are clothed in and inseparable from the ideology. There is a continual interplay
between ideology and actuality. The interplay is probably most often one of
cause and effect; ideology is the cause usually, and the reality is the effect.
To look at a communist revolution without taking into account the ideology is
like surveying the damage done on Eniwetok Atoll without knowing that a hydrogen
bomb was exploded there.

It is important, then, to grasp the pattern of the Bolshevik Revolution. It is
equally important to make a running account of the interplay between ideology
and actuality. Ideology was not only at work in the events in Russia from 1917
onward, but it was also being shaped and hardened by the particular turns of
events. To put it another way, communist ideology today is largely Marxism plus
the Russian experience as the latter has been ideologized. A topical approach is
more appropriate to an account, then, than a strictly chronological one.

## 1. The Violent Seizure of Power

On October 25 (Julian calendar), 1917, the Bolsheviks gained control over the
points of power in Petrograd, the capital city of the Russian Empire. The
climactic event was the storming and taking of the Winter Palace by armed force
on the evening of the 25th and the early morning of the 26th. The Winter Palace
was the headquarters of the Provisional Government, and the cabinet was in
session there even as Bolsheviks fought their way through the labyrinth of
corridors and rooms to where they were. A guard entered the chamber where the
cabinet was meeting.

Kishkin, the Governor-General, did not seem to know whether the Palace had
actually been occupied. "It is taken," the cadet replied. "They have taken all
the entrances. Everyone has surrendered. Only this room is being guarded. What
does the Provisional Government order?"

"Tell them," said Kishkin, "that we don't want bloodshed, that we yield to
force, that we surrender."[^5_1]

So it was, with hardly a whimper, that the government fell.

In the next several weeks, the Bolsheviks consolidated their control. Prime
Minister Aleksandr Kerensky escaped from Petrograd just as the revolt was coming
to a head. He sought to gather an army to retake the capital, but he could
muster only seven hundred soldiers from the once vast armies of Russia, and this
force was turned back by Bolshevik forces only a few days after the storming of
the Winter Palace. Moscow fell to the Bolsheviks with no greater struggle than
had occurred in Petrograd. Local soviets (councils) had for months held dominant
positions throughout much of the empire. It was only necessary for Bolsheviks to
dominate these in order to come to power, which they were usually able to do
rather quickly.

The culminating act of the Bolshevik seizure of power came with the dissolution
of the Constituent Assembly which met in January, 1918. Ever since the
abdication of the Czar there had been talk of holding general elections,
assembling a parliament, drawing up a constitution, and regularizing the
government. The elections were held late in 1917. Even with freedom of
campaigning curtailed and the Bolsheviks in power in many places, they still did
not do well. The Bolshevik candidates received less than one-fourth of the total
vote cast. The Socialist Revolutionary Party got a plurality of the votes and of
deputies elected to the assembly.[^5_2] The question then became whether or not
the Bolsheviks would convene the assembly. The Bolshevik, Uritsky, put it this
way: "Shall we convene the Constituent Assembly? Yes. Shall we disperse it?
Perhaps; it depends on circumstances."[^5_3] It was permitted to hold one meeting,
but the Bolsheviks used force to prevent it when the Assembly tried to meet
again. The Bolshevik Party held such reins of governmental power as existed in
the Russian Empire.

How had the Bolsheviks been able to seize power? They were, after all, a
minority party. The soviets, which brooked so large during 1917, were not even
creations of the Bolsheviks for the most part. The party itself consisted of
only a tiny portion of the vast population of Russia. The answer can be reduced
to a single word—Violence! It was the willingness of the Bolsheviks to employ
violence that offers the immediate explanation of how they came to power. It
distinguished them from the Mensheviks. It distinguished them from the majority
of the Socialist Revolutionaries. (A minority, called left S-R's, joined with
the Bolsheviks.)

The Bolshevik use of violence may be sufficiently illustrated here by what
happened when the Constituent Assembly met for its first and only session. On
the day that it was to meet, the Bolsheviks called out large numbers of soldiers
and sailors loyal to them to surround, guard, and control the Tauride Palace
where the meeting was to be held. Even before the Assembly met, a crowd that had
gathered outside was fired upon, and several were killed. The crowd dispersed,
obviously intimidated by the killings. What then occurred has been described
this way:

> The Tauride Palace was an armed camp. All doors were closed except the main
> entrance. The entrance hall was crowded with armed soldiers and sailors, who
> examined the credentials of the deputies and amused themselves by commenting
> aloud on whether it was preferable to shoot, hang or bayonet the
> deputies.[^5_4]

There was an attempt when the deputies had gathered in the hall to conduct the
session according to Russian tradition. The custom was for the oldest member to
preside during the organization. This task fell to a man by the name of Sergey
Shvetsov, who was a Socialist Revolutionary. But the Bolsheviks would not have
it so:

> Suddenly there was an uproar. Everyone was shouting at once, the guards were
> hammering their rifle butts on the floor, the Bolshevik deputies were pounding
> their fists on the desks and stamping their feet, while Bolshevik soldiers in
> the public galleries coolly aimed their rifles at the unfortunate Shvetsov....
> He had just time to say "I declare the Constituent Assembly open," and to ring
> his bell, when the bell was snatched from him. In place of the towering
> white-haired Shvetsov there was the small, dark, black-bearded Yakov Sverdlov,
> who announced amid cries of "Hangman!" and "Wash the blood off your hands!"
> that the Bolshevik Executive Committee... had authorized him to declare the
> Constituent Assembly open.[^5_5]

Some organization and activity was permitted, but the Bolsheviks finally grew
weary and turned out the lights. Thus began and ended representative government
in the Soviet Union.

Violence triumphed, and in its train came the Terror, but let that wait for now.
Marx and Engels had envisioned the need for violent overturn of governments in
order to bring about the revolution but for different reasons than prevailed in
Russia. Indeed, Marx had not believed it possible that the first communist
revolution would occur in Russia. The man who conceived the possibility, prodded
it into being, contrived a theory for it, and led it was Vladimir Ilyich
Ulyanov, known to the world as Nikolai Lenin, though he was also known as V.I.
Lenin, and until his death was called "Ilyich" by those who knew him.

## 2. Leninism

According to Marxian theory, Russia was not even close to being ripe for a
communist revolution in 1917. It was, in the lingo of both progressivism and
Marxism, a "backward" country. The population was preponderantly rural, and most
people made their living by farming. The strides in industrialization before
World War I had, it is true, increased the number of industrial workers in such
centers as Petrograd and Moscow, but they were still only a small portion of the
population. This situation did not fit into the Marxian theory of revolution. If
a communist revolution was to be a proletarian revolution, and Marxism
envisioned nothing else, Russia did not have the one ingredient essential to
it—a proletarian majority.

To get around this difficulty, Lenin developed several stratagems, mostly
theoretical but tied in to some extent with the actual situation. By so doing,
he wrenched Marxism off its supposed historical course and gave it a new
direction. It was a fateful shift for the world, for it laid the groundwork for
communist revolutions in industrially backward countries, which is where they
have mostly occurred, and took Marx off the hook, so to speak, for the errors in
his predictions about advanced countries. The doctrinal result is known as
Leninism, though it is generally accepted by the communist faithful as orthodox
Marxism.

Lenin attempted to patch over the gaping theoretical hole by proclaiming that
the revolution in Russia was part and parcel of an imminent world-wide
revolution. The time was right for that, he declared. Imperialism was the final
stage of capitalism. World War I was the death agony of the last imperial thrust
of moribund capitalism. In the midst of or in the wake of the war would come the
inevitable communist revolution everywhere. The situation was ripening for
revolution in Germany, and if Germany went, could the rest of the world resist?
(It is easy to forget now how closely Marxian theory was tied to the German
situation.) With the tide of history rolling shoreward to bring world
revolution, what did it matter in the scheme of things if it rolled over Russia
first? Except, it mattered a great deal to V.I. Lenin; it must come first in
Russia. Why? There is an obvious answer. Lenin was Russian, and he was the
chosen vessel to usher in the world revolution. No other will quite do.

## A Man Possessed

Lenin was like a man possessed from the moment he arrived at the Finland Station
in Petrograd in April of 1917. Indeed, he may have been obsessed for years, but
the obsession appeared now to have him in its control. If an artist had been
charged with the task of painting a portrait of a man possessed, he would have
done well to choose Lenin as a model. Lenin looked the part with his wide
forehead, large head, and penetrating eyes. He was cold, hard, determined, and
often appeared to be devoid of ordinary human weaknesses. (After strenuous
sessions when debates had gone on late into the night and sleep for most could
hardly await a bed, Lenin could be found engrossed in reading or writing.) Time
and again during the months from April to October, 1917, Lenin threatened
defiance of all the party organs if he would not have his way. This childishness
was a product, plausibly, of his obsession.

Now a case can be made, and has been, indeed, was made at the time, that Lenin
was an agent of the German Imperial Government. It is fact that he and his
entourage were shipped through Germany in a sealed train by the government. It
is also known that the Bolshevik Party received money from the German
government.[^5_6] Moreover, Lenin's activities might have been little different
from what they were had he been a paid German agent. From the moment he arrived
in Russia he worked toward getting Russia out of the war. He labored also to
undermine what remained of the morale in the army. Once the Bolsheviks seized
power they acted as quickly as they could to end the war with Germany, which
they accomplished with the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in early 1918. Even those of
less than average inclination to suspicion might suspect collusion from these
circumstances.

But there is a better explanation than the German-agent theory, and it accounts
for more of the facts. It is this. Lenin believed he had discerned the course of
history, not the course of history in some general and theoretical way as Marx
had, but its very unfolding before his eyes. The long-awaited revolution was
ready to take place. Lenin believed himself to be riding the wave of history to
its cresting, and when the moment came he must be at the helm to direct the
course of the craft. The best evidence for this is his attitude and behavior in
the weeks, days and hours just before October 25, 1917.

Lenin knew as well as anyone that the authority of the Provisional Government
which had always been tenuous was deteriorating. It might have been toppled in
July had the Bolsheviks directed the forces at their command during the
demonstrations. General Kornilov attempted a "counter-revolution" in August, but
it failed. Lenin had to go into hiding in August to keep from being arrested by
the government. From that time on he became more and more insistent that the
Bolsheviks must overturn the government. In early October, he wrote:

> Comrades! Our revolution is passing through a highly critical time. This
> crisis coincides with the great crisis of a growing worldwide socialist
> revolution and of a struggle against world imperialism. The responsible
> leaders of our party are confronted with a gigantic task; if they do not carry
> it out, it will mean a total collapse of the internationalist proletarian
> movement. The situation is such that delay truly means death.[^5_7]

He had become almost hysterical by October 24:

> Comrades: As I write these lines on the evening of the 24^th^, the situation
> is impossibly critical. It is clearer than clear that now, in truth, a delay
> in the uprising is equivalent to death....
>
> The bourgeois onslaught of the Kornilovists, the removal of Verkhovsky, show
> that we cannot wait. We must, no matter what, this evening, tonight, arrest
> the government, after we disarm the cadets....
>
> We cannot wait! We may lose everything![^5_8]

Lenin was beside himself. Though he was repeatedly refused permission to come
out of hiding and take up his work at Bolshevik headquarters, he finally ignored
it and went there anyhow. From that moment, he took direct leadership of the
revolution which he forged.

## Minority Rule

Whether there was a world revolution or not—there was not—, the fact remained
that the Bolsheviks were a minority in Russia. They had promised land to the
peasants and peace—withdrawal from the war—to everyone, particularly soldiers,
but these promises did not secure a majority. The Bolsheviks still lacked a
substantial "proletariat" as well as numerical majority.

Leninism entails making a revolution by imposing the will of a minority on the
majority. Lenin, in fact, was contemptuous of majorities. Majorities, he
declared, were simply means by which the "bourgeois" deceived the masses. The
"important thing is not the number, but the correct expression of the ideas and
policies of the really revolutionary proletariat. "[^5_9] In answer to the
complaint of socialist opponents, he wrote:

> They have not understood that a vote within the framework, the institutions,
> within the habits of bourgeois parliamentarism, is part of the bourgeois state
> apparatus, which must be smashed and broken up from top to bottom in order to
> realize the dictatorship of the proletariat, for the transition from bourgeois
> democracy to proletarian democracy.
>
> They have not understood that all serious questions of politics are decided,
> not at all by votes, but by civil war, when history places the dictatorship of
> the proletariat as the order of the day.[^5_10]

"Civil war" is the key to understanding communism, but how Lenin conducted it
successfully with a minority needs to be grasped.

## 3. The Leverage Principle and Party Rule

Lenin did not develop the theory of party rule simply as an expedient when it
turned out that the Bolsheviks were a minority in Russia. His task might have
been easier had he had a majority in the Constituent Assembly, but it might not
have. He should be believed when he says that majorities do not matter to
communism (except for propaganda purposes), for communism must be imposed on the
populace however elections turn out. The instrument for doing this would be the
tightly knit, disciplined, and relatively small party. Lenin had for several
years prior to 1917 been attempting to develop the core of such a party in
Russia. He had also developed a justification of it within the outer bounds, at
least, of Marxism. Alfred G. Meyer has summarized the theory this way:

> The Leninist conception of the party is derived from this acknowledged
> superiority of socialist theory (consciousness) over the spontaneous movement
> of the working class. The party is conceived as the organization, incarnation,
> or institutionalization of class consciousness. In it, historical will and
> purposiveness are to acquire domination over unguided and irrational instinct
> and drift.... The task of the party is "to make the proletariat capable of
> fulfilling its great historical mission.... The party exists for the very
> purpose of going ahead of the masses and showing the masses the way."[^5_11]

Even despite themselves, no doubt.

The manner in which the power of the party is exercised is a variation of the
leverage principle. Whether the phrase has ever been used in connection with
communism or not, it is a useful one for visualizing what is done. In financial
circles, the leverage principle involves the use of a relatively small amount of
money to control and profit from something much more expensive. For example, one
might buy a $100 stock by putting up $20 in cash and borrowing the rest. Suppose
that the next day the stock goes to $120; it might be sold, and the investor
would have doubled his money. In communism, the leverage principle is the means
by which a party composing a tiny minority controls and manipulates the whole
populace.

## Bolshevik Leverage

The Bolsheviks showed themselves astute at using leverage from the outset. Even
the adoption of the term, "bolshevik," was a leverage maneuver. The term means
majority. Yet at the Social Democratic gathering where the followers of Lenin
adopted the title many votes were taken and those who came to call themselves
Bolsheviks won only one. Nonetheless, thereafter they claimed the prestige of
being the majority. Bolsheviks maneuvered successfully to gain leverage in the
soviets even before the revolution. They used the practice of having a political
commissar in military units from the outset. They were not long in extending the
practice of having such a person in factories, on collective farms, and so on.
The secret police, which were reorganized as the Cheka by the Bolsheviks, were a
prime example of leverage.

But what made the leverage principle work to enable a small party to control the
whole? How, for example, could a single political commissar control a military
unit? The answer is simple enough. The leverage was exerted by intimidation,
violence, and terror. Intimidation, violence, and terror are not incidental to
communism; they are central and essential. They are its *modus operandi.* There
are those who believe that Lenin's insistence on attacking on October 25 arose
not so much from its necessity in taking over the government, which might have
capitulated anyhow, but from the desire to resort to violence. It is plausible
enough. Only by letting loose violence would the party have the necessary means
at its disposal. And, in a land under the sway of violence, the man who is the
most ruthless, determined, and arbitrary in employing it is king.  Unrestrained
use of intimidation and violence is, of course, the method of gangsters, but
even gangsters must have a head or leader. The leader is the one who initiates
the violence and thus dominates those around him. As indicated in an earlier
article, communist rule is gangsterism plus ideology. Lenin was the ideologue
personified; when he began to initiate violence he became also the leader of the
gangsters.

## 4. Personal Dictatorship

Almost immediately following his death in 1924 Nikolai Lenin was transformed
into a virtual god by his followers (and even, it is said, by many who were not
communists within Russia). The veneration of him went beyond all bounds. In
death he became what he never was during his lifetime—all things to all men, the
gentle persuader, the tolerant leader, the incarnation of a benign and
beneficent communism. In fact, Lenin was the first dictator of the twentieth
century, and he was a model of what made the term hated and despised. He was a
dictator in practice, and developed a theoretical justification for it.

No sooner had the Bolsheviks seized power than Lenin began to rule by decree. It
was the most personal and direct manner of rule. Much of it was done by
telephone, for his desk was covered by the instruments. Examples of rule by
decree abound, but one will have to suffice here. The following, issued in
December, 1917, was supposed to remove all inequalities in the army:

1. To do away with all ranks and titles from the rank of corporal to that of
   general inclusive. The army of the Russian Republic is henceforth to be
   composed of free and equal citizens bearing the honorable title of "soldier
   of the revolutionary army";

2. To do away with all privileges and the external marks formerly connected with
   the different ranks and titles....[^5_12]

Evidence that Lenin instituted terror survives in messages which he sent out.
The following was sent in August, 1918:

> Your telegram received. It is necessary to organize an intensive guard of
> picked reliable men to conduct a merciless mass terror against kulaks, priests
> and White Guards....

More explicitly, he wrote to the Soviet of Nizhni Novgorod in the same month:

An open uprising of White Guards is clearly in preparation in Nizhni Novgorod.
You must mobilize all forces, establish a triumvirate of dictators, introduce
immediately mass terror, shoot and deport hundreds of prostitutes who ply
soldiers and officers with vodka. Do not hesitate for a moment. You must act
promptly: mass searches for hidden arms; mass deportations of Mensheviks and
security risks.[^5_13]

Telegrams are given to being terse, but even after that is taken into account it
is clear that Lenin did not ameliorate the severity of his death sentences by
wishing that God might have mercy on the souls of the victims.

When two or three people are gathered together, even in the name of the Lord,
one of them is likely to disagree with the others all too soon. Such
disagreement is equally likely in secular affairs, and is certain where such an
overweening concept is involved as concerting all activity to achieving felicity
on earth. In short, the idea which holds the world in its grip is a subtle
prescription for dictatorship, for only thus could all effort be concerted, if
it could be done at all. Personal dictatorship is even more clearly required by
communism. The violence and terror are supposed to be justified by the ends to
be attained by the revolution. These, in turn, are certified by an orthodoxy of
ideology. Such orthodoxy can only prevail when one man prescribes and all others
accept or are beaten into submission.

Lenin put it somewhat differently, but the conclusion was about the same. He
called his theory of dictatorship "Democratic Centralism." His meaning is fairly
clear from this description of it:

The party is in a position in which the strictest centralism and the most
stringent discipline are absolute necessities. All decisions of higher
headquarters are absolutely binding for the lower.[^5_14]

A scholar has characterized Lenin's views in this way: "We come closer to the
real issue when we realize that all discussion was suspect to him, because it
was a waste of time and because it might threaten the unity of the party in
action."[^5_15] When Lenin had wrought revolution, idea had become actuality, and
those who differed were proposing to argue with reality. When the reality is a
gun, the debate is closed. Lenin sent a telegram to Communists in Novgorod about
something that they had done with which *he* disagreed. The message contained
these words: "I warn you that I shall have the chairmen of the *guberniya
*executive committees, the Cheka and members of the executive committee arrested
for this and see that they are shot."[^5_16] Fortunately for them, he didn't go
through with it.

## 5. Civil War

There was a civil war in Russia from 1918 into 1921 between the Reds and the
Whites, but that is not the civil war under discussion here, nor did Lenin refer
to the conflict between the Reds and Whites in speaking about civil war in an
earlier quotation. What is here being called civil war is what communists refer
to as revolution. Revolution is too vague and general an appellation; whereas,
civil war calls attention to the true character of what was going on. It was a
conflict between the Bolsheviks, or Communists, on the one hand, and the
customs, institutions, and possessions of the people on the other.

J.P. Nettl emphasized the strangeness of these new rulers by the following
description of them:

> A Bolshevik was... anti-social in the normal sense of the word. He did not
> communicate readily, he did not seek friends, he did not attempt to make
> himself agreeable, he had no time for sociability or relaxation as such. Since
> he believed in a philosophy which was totally incomprehensible to
> non-Marxists, it was often difficult even to talk to him....
>
> The dichotomy between Party and society in the early days was thus reinforced
> by a clash of cultures and of language...[^5_17]

Party against society, that was one dimension of the conflict, but there was
also Party against the state, Party against the army, Party against religion,
Party against the money supply, Party against the family, Party against
property, Party against venerable custom and tradition, and Party against
everything that had been Russian, Christian, or Western Civilization.

It may not have appeared this way to many people at first. True, there was a
great wave of destruction that swept over Russia in the wake of the Bolshevik
seizure of power, but many people accepted much of the destruction gladly. The
remains of the old regime—the Duma, the Senate (supreme court), and local
governments—were destroyed, but if their passing was mourned there is little
record of it. The army was destroyed, but most soldiers hardly regretted that.
As one historian notes: "The crumbling army was pushed to complete
disintegration by decrees ordering election of officers... and abolishing all
ranks and decorations. What units were left in being were speedily
demobilized.[^5_18]

The system of alliances with the rest of the world was discarded when the
Bolsheviks made a separate peace with Germany. The Russian Empire was supposed
to be dissolved, and the various nationalities were promised virtual
independence. The workers were encouraged to take over the factories and run
them. The peasants were bidden to take the land for their own. It looked at
first as if the revolutionary promises might be fulfilled, as if a large portion
of the populace was to be awarded the spoils of victory.

## New Tyranny for Old

But the Bolsheviks gave, and the Bolsheviks took away, almost before the spoils
could be grasped. The old state structure was destroyed, but in its stead a new
state was built, more autocratic than the old, under the complete control of the
Communist Party with no vestige of popular control, with a new secret police to
impose its will. The old army was hardly demobilized before a new one was being
built. Leon Trotsky forged this new army into fighting trim. Compulsory military
training for workers and peasants was established, the death penalty for
desertion restored (it having been abolished under the Provisional Government),
election of officers ended, and many of the old officers brought back into
service.

The only nationality ever to be granted independence was Finland; after that,
under the leadership of Joseph Stalin the process of consolidation of the empire
was renewed. There were no more foreign alliances, but in their stead the
Communist International (Comintern) was set up to foment revolution around the
world. The workers did not run the factories for long; the government
nationalized the industries, brought back many of the old managers to run them,
and commissars representing the Party kept a watchful eye over them. The
peasants might own the land, but the government took the produce, or most of it,
by simply confiscating it. Even peace was short-lived, for a real civil war
between the Reds and the Whites broke out in 1918.

It is not possible to convey the full sweep of the revolutionary thrust of those
first months and years. Perhaps the most symbolic event was the movement of the
capital from Petrograd to Moscow. Peter the Great had moved it to what was then
called St. Petersburg as a part of his program of the westernization of Russia.
It was to be Russia's "window to Europe." Whatever the practical reasons for
returning the capital to its ancient seat, the act was laden with symbolic
meaning. The Kremlin, the walled city, was an ancient religious center. Its
churches were some of the most magnificent of Eastern Christendom.

## Religious Symbolism

One might suppose that Moscow and the Kremlin were emblematic of all that the
Bolsheviks hated and wished to destroy. So they undoubtedly were, but it never
does to forget that the Communists were founding a new religion. What better way
to do so than at the seat of the old, and what greater profanation of the old
than to locate it in the Kremlin? Comintern and Party agents headquartered there
could go forth to convert all nations even as Christian missionaries had done of
old.

The Bolsheviks did not wait long to begin their assault on the family and
religion. In a pamphlet on the family, Alexandra Kollontai, a leading Bolshevik,
had this to say:

> The family ceases to be necessary. It is not necessary to the state because
> domestic economy is no longer advantageous to the state, it needlessly
> distracts women workers from more useful productive labour. It is not
> necessary to members of the family themselves because the other task of the
> family—the bringing up of children—is gradually taken over by society.[^5_19]

Lenin did not go so far. Instead, he acted to remove many supports to the
stability of the family. A new marriage code required civil registration of
marriages and made religious ceremonies of no account at law. Divorce was made
possible on demand by either or both parties. Illegitimate children were
accorded the same rights as legitimate children. Both sexes were declared to be
equal. Abortion was legalized in 1920 "for so long as the moral survivals of the
past and economic conditions of the present compel some women to resort to this
operation."[^5_20]

As to religion, the Party announced in 1919 that it was guided by the conviction
that the realization of planned order and consciousness... can alone bring with
it a complete dying out of religious prejudices. The party aims at a complete
destruction of the link between the exploiting classes and the organization of
religious propaganda by assisting the effective liberation of the toiling masses
from religious prejudices and by organizing the broadest propaganda in favour of
scientific enlightenment and against religion.[^5_21]

But the attack on religion was hardly restricted to propaganda. Church and state
were proclaimed to be separate. Church property was confiscated. Church activity
in the schools was banned. And there was widespread persecution: some priests
were killed, and churches taken over for secular uses.

## A Record of Destruction

By 1921, the Russia that had been was virtually in ruins. The old order had been
almost completely destroyed, but the bright utopia foretold by communist
prophets had not emerged. Much damage had undoubtedly been done by participation
in World War I and during the war between the Reds and Whites, but even more of
the devastation should probably be charged to the revolutionary thrust. In 1921
industrial production was only about thirteen per cent of what it had been
before World War I. Seventy-four million tons of grain had been harvested in
1916 compared with only 30 million tons in 1919, and production continued to
decline. The Bolsheviks had almost destroyed the value of the money by drastic
increases of the supply (inflation). Famine conditions existed in many areas.

The civil war was over, but new rebellions were already occurring. People were
leaving the cities to seek sustenance in the countryside. The population of
Moscow had been about 2 million in 1917, but it fell to 800,000 by 1920. The
population of Leningrad had been 2,416,000 in 1916; it dropped to 722,000 by
1920. The situation was desperate.

That, then, was the Bolshevik Revolution and its outcome. The Russian people
would suffer much more, and, in some ways, worse, as they were beset later by
Permanent Revolution, to use Trotsky's phrase, but for the time being the
revolutionary thrust was virtually ended. The Bolshevik Party had already become
the Communist Party, and later revolutionary action would not be called or
attributed directly to Bolshevism. Lenin restored some freedom of trade with his
New Economic Policy (NEP) in 1921, and conditions began to improve somewhat.

Having intertwined ideology with developments in the account thus far, it is in
order now to sort out the myth from the reality of communism.

Next: 6. *The Communist Facade*

[^5_1]: Robert V. Daniels, *Red October* (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons,
  1967), p. 196.

[^5_2]: See Donald W. Treadgold, *Twentieth Century Russia* (Chicago: Rand
  McNally, 1964, 2nd ed.), p. 157.

[^5_3]: *lbid.,* p. 158.

[^5_4]: Robert Payne, *The Life and Death of Lenin* (New York: Simon and
  Schuster, 1964), p. 431.

[^5_5]: *Ibid.,* p. 433.

[^5_6]: See Daniels, *op. cit.,* p. 40.

[^5_7]: Quoted in *ibid.,* p. 71.

[^5_8]: *Ibid.,* p. 157.

[^5_9]: Alfred G. Meyer, *Leninism* (New York: Praeger, 1957), p. 35.

[^5_10]: *Ibid.,* pp. 69-70.

[^5_11]: pp. 32-33.

[^5_12]: Payne,* op. cit.,* p. 414.

[^5_13]: *Ibid.,* p. 482.

[^5_14]: Meyer, *op. cit.,* p. 99.

[^5_15]: *Ibid.,* p. 96.

[^5_16]: Payne, *op. cit.,* pp. 480-81.

[^5_17]: J.P. Nettl, *The Soviet Achievement* (New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp;
  World, 1967), p. 64. 18Treadgold, *op. cit.,* p. 156.

[^5_18]: Quoted in Edward H. Carr, *Socialism in One Country,* I (New York:
  Macmillan, 1958), p. 31.

[^5_19]: Ibid., p. 29.

[^5_20]: *Ibid.,* p. 38.

