# World in the Grip of an Idea: 6. Russia - The Communist Facade

[Wednesday, June 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/june-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

This story is said to have been told by a man who served as a tour guide in and
around Detroit, Michigan. One day he was assigned to show Ford's River Rouge
plant to a group of visiting Russian engineers. The guide noted that they were
soon in a jovial mood, laughing, talking, and generally in a festive spirit.
Just as they passed the huge parking lot filled with cars, they became even more
animated than usual. The one who spoke the best English addressed this question
to the guide:

> "Do they prepare themselves like this to impress all their visitors? Or is it
> just for us?"
>
> "What do you mean?" the guide asked.
>
> "The impressive number of cars. It's a flattering illustration of Ford's
> capacity for production." The guide pointed out that Ford would hardly have
> arranged such a display since the cars were used and some of them were old.
> Moreover, the visitors must have already observed that there were many cars in
> the United States. But his answer did not satisfy the Russian. "Then to whom
> do they belong?" "To the people who work at the plant and in the offices.
> Workers." "You're kidding," he said, "so many cars?"

The guide explained that many of the Ford employees owned their own cars. The
Russian declared that such a notion was typical propaganda. There was a way to
prove it, the guide said. It would only be necessary to ask workers to whom they
would talk on the assembly line whether they owned cars or not. But that would
prove nothing, the Russian maintained.

"We know that old trick. The plant is well prepared for their visit. Every
worker has learned by heart how to answer our questions. Unless he wants to be
fired or arrested he'll have to give the proper answer."

All right, if asking them in the plant would not prove anything, why not wait
until the shifts changed, and as a worker approached his car, ask him whose it
was? But the Russian was only amused:

> "What do you take me for?" he asked, "an idiot? It's simple to stage such a
> show. I don't hold Americans for bunglers. If you do something, you do it
> well.  You are a big nation, and you know how to deal with other
> nations."[^6_1]

Nothing could convince the Russian that it was not a show staged for the benefit
of the visiting engineers.

Variations on this story have been told a good many times. It is sometimes told
to illustrate the disparity between the material condition of Soviet workers and
those in the United States. That is undoubtedly an important point, but it is
not the one to be emphasized here. It may also be told to call attention to the
fact that tours in the Soviet Union have for many years had a carefully arranged
itinerary through areas prepared in advance to provide a good impression to
visitors. This brings us somewhat nearer the point, but does not begin to
comprehend all that is involved in it.

## A Massive Propaganda Effort

What is involved is an attempt to grasp the impact of an idea which has had the
Russian Empire in its grip for about sixty years. That impact is by no means
easily understood. Our understanding of any complex development, or of anything,
for that matter, is always partial and incomplete. In the best of circumstances,
our vision is impaired by the limitations of the angle we are taking, by our
inclination to put new wine into old bottles, i.e., to fit the new experience
into the confines of what we already knew, and by the tendency to put the best
or the worst face on a thing.  But these usual obstacles to understanding are
greatly augmented in the case of the Soviet Union by a massive propaganda effort
and by a concerted deliberate effort to conceal the truth.

Communism has been deliberately hidden behind a facade, a more extensive facade
than has ever been erected before, a facade of such dimensions that the parable
with which this article begins may have actually occurred, either once or many
times. That is, the Russian people are familiar with such an extensive facade
that they could actually imagine that Ford Motor Company would arrange an
immense spectacle of automobiles to deceive a few obscure visiting engineers.

## Facade vs. Reality

There are two common ways of misinterpreting the facade. One is the obvious
mistaking of the facade for the reality of communism.  The literature on Soviet
Communism abounds with examples of people who returned from visits to Russia and
wrote favorable accounts of what they saw, accounts whose credibility depended
upon accepting the facade for the whole reality. The other misinterpretation
comes from those who have grasped the dimensions of the facade and perceive the
gigantic hypocrisy which has produced it. Such hypocrisy, they tend to conclude,
can only mean that communism is only a sham, that Communists are hypocrites
hiding their lust for power behind an ideological mask.

There is a goodly amount of literature, produced mainly in the last decade or
so, which offers much inferential evidence in support of this interpretation.
Nonetheless, those who draw this conclusion have got the matter wrong-end-to.
They are looking at the effect and are mistaking it for the cause. The facade is
an effect; so are the power opportunities. The love of power resides in every
breast, dormant or active; the lust for power is an effect of opportunities to
wield it without let or hindrance. Communist ideology is not a mask; it is a
cause. It is *the* cause which has produced the above effects. Before explaining
why, how, and in what ways the facade is an effect, however, it is in order to
explore the dimensions of the facade in the Soviet Union.

## The Several Soviet Governmental Fronts

The government of the Soviet Union is a facade. An elaborate governmental
structure exists in the Soviet Union, a structure which bears no relation to
decision making and very little to the exercise of power. In theory, the power
of government is vested in the Supreme Soviet, which is composed of a Council of
the Union and a Council of Nationalities. Members are elected by universal
suffrage, and more than 90 per cent of those eligible usually vote. When the
Supreme Soviet is not in session, which is most of the time, its legislative
functions are supposed to be performed by an executive body, called a Presidium.
What could be more democratic?

Except that the Supreme Soviet is only a facade, window dressing, so to speak.
It merely approves the decisions that have already been made. There is usually
only one candidate for office, and he (or she) has been selected by the powers
that be. In reality, there is no impact upon the government from the populace.
Actual power is supposed to be wielded by the Communist Party, whose membership
over the years has ranged from, say, 2 million members upwards toward 10
million. There is an elaborate structure of party organization from bottom to
top which parallels that of the formal government. But the Party is not a
decision making institution; it is a decision executing institution. The way it
works has been described by a historian thusly (He refers to the Stalin Era, but
much the same could be said for the whole period of Communist rule.):

Huge as it was, the Communist party entrusted its authority to a Central
Committee of some seventy or more…. Directing the labors of the Committee, and
indeed of the mighty USSR as a whole, was the party *Politburo,* called the
*Presidium* after 1952, usually of about sixteen men and women. This powerful,
self-perpetuating institution responded in the final analysis to the will and
whims of the arbitrary despot, Joseph Stalin.[^6_2]

It should be clear, then, that the governmental structure involves not one
facade but a series of facades in a row, as it were, each lower in visibility or
height as it is looked at from front to back but greater in power. Popular
elections are entirely facade, the most visible and the least substantial of the
facades. The Supreme Soviet, the "parliament," is a front which exercises no
real power. Its Presidium technically wields power, but it is actually a
mechanism to be manipulated by those further behind the scenes. The Party, too,
is a facade, in that it is a symbol of rather than the real source of power.
Even the Politburo, or Party Presidium, has sometimes been mainly a facade, for
its members have been subject to the will of the single man in charge.

## The Role of the Party

Nonetheless, the Party is most important. He who can speak for the Party, i.e.,
lay down the Party line, rules the Soviet Union.  The Party is not so much the
base of power, though in periods when there is a contest for dominance within
the Politburo it may sometimes have been, but it is always the ideological arm
of power. As one man becomes dominant, his base of power becomes his control of
all armed force, especially the secret police, for through them he controls all
else. But all this-hinges on control over the Party, which is a way of saying
that it depends upon making the "correct" interpretation of ideology.

Lenin's greatest invention was of the *facade* of party rule. He did not, of
course, invent party rule, for that had existed in England, say, before Karl
Marx was even born. Party rule in England is a device for rule by majority, and
the party claims its right to rule on the basis of popular election and ability
to obtain majorities on key issues in the House of Commons.

Communists neither necessarily have nor do they claim to rule by majorities. The
Communist Party is not a political party in the accepted or expected sense. It
does not claim to be a *part;* it claims to be the *whole.* That is, it claims
to act for all those who have any right to rule, i.e., the proletariat, the
peasants, or whoever. It claims this right on the basis of ideology. It acts not
by majorities but in unison and under strict discipline. The Party is a facade;
the reality is ideology, and the personification of reality is the one man, and
there can *only* be one man, who can set forth the correct interpretation of
ideology. Every member of the Party must then accept this line or be subject to
expulsion, or worse. Such party rule is now the norm in many parts of the world.
It is rule by an idea.

## Constitutions Used to Promote Communism

Communism operates, too, behind a cover of words. It may be that the best place
to examine this facade is in the Soviet constitutions. There have been several
such documents. The first was promulgated in 1918, the second in 1924, and
probably the most ambitious in 1936. They are in form constitutions, in content
ideological, and, in fact, facades.

In form, a constitution sets forth the power of the government, who is to
exercise the powers of government, may prescribe limitations on the power, and
lays down the procedures by which the government is to operate. A constitution
may affirm certain rights as belonging to the people as well as those that
inhere in the limitations on the government. The Soviet constitutions appear to
do most of these things. They describe a governmental structure, tell how it is
to operate, and set forth certain rights belonging to approved classes, or to
the people generally.

But all this is misleading. One writer attempts to get around this fact by
ascribing a different purpose to the Soviet constitution than that of
traditional ones. He says, "In the Soviet Union, the Constitution... is regarded
far more as a symbol or summary of the existing structure of government than as
an immutable blueprint; it is descriptive rather than prescriptive...  ."[^6_3]
To which it must be replied that the constitutions are not very accurate as
descriptions, either, but, if they were, we would still say that something which
purports to be a constitution and is not prescriptive is not a constitution.

## A Class Document

The Soviet Constitutions are ideological in content.  The first one was
professedly a class document. "Members of the so-called exploiting
classes—businessmen, monks and priests... , police agents of the old
regime...—were disfranchised and denied the right to hold office." More, "The
Bill of Rights was restated in class terms. Freedom of speech, of press,
association, of assembly, and of access to education was to be reserved to the
working class...."[^6_4] They are ideological, too, in prescribing duties as
well as rights. But they are ideological in the deepest sense in that they are
neither faithful descriptions of the actual situation nor enforceable
prescriptions of what should be; they are formal statements of the stages in
history of the Communist Revolution in Russia at particular times.

The constitutions are facades. Neither the workers, nor any other class or group
enjoy freedom of speech, press, association, or religion in the Soviet Union.
There are no independent powers to contain or limit the exercise of power. The
Constitution of 1924 declared that the member republics had an inalienable right
to secede from the Soviet Union, but, as Stalin had said, "the demand for
secession…at the present stage of the revolution [has become] a profoundly
counterrevolutionary one."[^6_5] In short, secession was a right, but it could
not be permitted. The first two constitutions did not even acknowledge the role
of the Party in government. The Constitution of 1936 did ascribe a role to the
Party, but it did not expose it fully. The nature of the facades erected by
constitutions is well described in this summary by a scholar:

> The Soviet regime has demonstrated great skill in using the trappings of mass
> democracy to mask the entrenched position of the dictatorial elite which
> dominates Soviet society. Constitutional myths and symbols have been
> ingeniously adapted to contribute to the illusion of mass control. But the
> actual configurations of power in the system are difficult to conceal. The
> political realities of Soviet life speak the unmistakable language of
> one-party dictatorship in which ultimate power is deposited in a narrow ruling
> group in the Kremlin.[^6_6]

Sometimes even traditional branches of the government are largely facade. So it
is with the diplomatic and consular services. According to expert testimony,
they serve mainly to provide intelligence information and promote espionage in
foreign lands. *"Furthermore, the majority of personnel in Soviet embassies
abroad are KGB* [the "regular secret police"] *and GRU* [military secret police]
*employees.* The proportion of KGB staff officers to the rest of Soviet embassy
personnel is usually two men out of five. GRU staff officers number one man in
five."[^6_7] There is abundant testimony, too, that even cleaning women serve as
spies, and that all personnel in an embassy are subject to the control of the
secret police.

## The Church as a Front, Churchmen as Spies

Perhaps the strangest facade of all is that of the Orthodox Church in the Soviet
Union. It is strange because the Communist Party vowed from the beginning to
root out and destroy the remains of religion. The power of the government was
vigorously used for many years, is still used, against religion. Party members
may not be churchgoers; in general, those who have any position or status avoid
the outward practice of religion.  Churches, monasteries, and all sorts of
religious establishment have been closed on a vast scale. Parents were forbidden
to teach religion to their children.  Priests and ministers have been
persecuted. None of this succeeded in stifling religion in the Soviet Union. But
the Communists have followed another tack, have done so more or less from the
beginning. They have attempted to penetrate and subvert the churches, most
notably the Orthodox Church, to use the churches, so far as possible, for their
own ends.

One way the Church serves as a facade is by the hierarchy giving vocal support
for the regime. Hedrick Smith says: "Patriarch Pimen and other Orthodox prelates
make obligatory speeches praising Soviet policy at home and abroad. The Church
donates millions of rubles to the Soviet Peace Committee and other Communist
causes."[^6_8] Another writer states the case more directly:

The Church is subject to the guidance of the State Council for Religious
Affairs, which can overrule the Patriarch (the ruling bishop) or any Church
authority on any issue, religious or secular. The council exacts huge
"contributions" from the Church treasury for various causes, and compels Church
elders to lend their presence to state occasions, particularly large receptions
in the Kremlin to which foreigners are invited.[^6_9]

Robert G. Kaiser gives examples of how high churchmen present a facade to
newsmen to conceal the actual situation. These examples came out in a press
conference. The Metropolitan declared to the assembled press that "The State
does not interfere with the Church." In support of his view, he proclaimed that
the Church was publishing many new Bibles. As it turned out, it had published
80,000 in 20 years, 4,000 per year for from 30 to 50 million believers. Those
who attended the conference were each presented with a set of long playing
records which contained reproductions of the singing of much of the Church
liturgy. "The state record monopoly made the album, but it has never been sold
to the public. It is a special edition, made for the Church to hand out on
occasions like this one."[^6_10]

Considerable evidence has been accumulated that churchmen are often used as
spies by the secret police, and that some of them may actually be members of the
secret police. The Reverend Richard Wurmbrand testified in this fashion before a
Congressional committee:

> If you tell me that somebody is an official pastor in a Rumanian or a Russian
> church, I know that he is an informer of the Communist authorities. Without
> this, you can't be.

On Sunday you preach. On Monday you can be called to the so-called
representative of the Government Council for the Affairs of the Religious Cults,
and you are obliged to answer the questions: "Who has been in your church?" They
don't care about these old ones. "What Youth has been in church?" "Who is a
soulwinner?" If they have confessed something, "What have they confessed?" "Who
is zealous in prayer?" "What are their political attitudes?"[^6_11]

To the same effect, though much less dramatically, Kaiser says, "According to
believers in Moscow, the hierarchy is riddled with agents and
informers..."[^6_12] In this manner, the Communists attempt to transform the
churches into a facade.

## Equality for Women

Facades abound in Soviet Communism. Perhaps the most ubiquitous facade is
equality. Women are supposed to be equal with men. It is supposed to be a land
without special privilege, where even top Party officials receive only modest
salaries. Inhabitants of rural areas are in theory equal to city dwellers.
Though this facade is not well maintained, a good deal of energy goes into
creating the appearance of equality. Politburo members often dress plainly and
affect simple tastes. Yet, behind the scenes, privilege is the order of the day,
indeed, there is such an intricate array of privileges that it requires
considerable study to get to know them. Party members are, of course, privileged
over the general citizenry. The secret police have their own special stores
where they can buy goods not available to the general populace.

In one sense, women are equal to men, in the sense of working as hard as do men,
or harder. One writer says that "there has appeared in the streets of Communist
cities a strange creature whom people speak of as a 'working woman.' You can see
her on cranes, in railroad yards, at the heaviest construction sites, in mines,
on highway building jobs, etc."[^6_13] But if she is married her "equality"
surely adds to her burdens. "The chronically low level of the material sphere of
life usually necessitates employment by both parties to the marriage, but the
woman still has to care for her home and children. In such circumstances, the
woman's life becomes in effect a kind of penal servitude of early rising,
working in an office or factory from nine to five, standing in line for
groceries... , doing the housecleaning... , preparing meals for her husband and
children in moments of paralyzing exhaustion."[^6_14] The facade of equality
often masks a brutalizing inequality.

## Privileges for Leaders

The special privileges of the leaders are at least partially hidden behind a
variety of facades. Here is one brief description of how the system works:

> License plates beginning with MOC belong to members and staff of the Party's
> Central Committee, and illegal left turns are one of the privileges that
> accrue to such citizens. They come to Granovskovo Street to collect more
> special privileges—food and clothing sold in a special store open only to
> them. The store is hidden behind a door marked BUREAU OF SPECIAL PASSES....
> Granovskovo Street is usually lined with chauffeur-driven cars waiting for
> their official proprietors to come out of the store. Most of the customers
> emerge carrying nondescript packages wrapped in brown paper.[^6_15]

Their special privileges are much more extensive, of course, but this one
example exposes the character of the facade.

There is a great difference between life in the major cities and that in small
cities and rural areas. A part of the communist facade is of a modernized,
industrialized land with giant hydro-electric dams, huge steel and oil
industries, large mechanized state farms, clean subway systems, and so on.
Hedrick Smith reported this description by a Russian of actual conditions:

> "On the stronger, larger state farms not far from Moscow or Leningrad, or
> those built for show... , conditions are better in every way—stone buildings,
> separate apartments for each working family, a sewage system, running water.
> This was the way it was on the first two state farms where I worked. They were
> each about an hour from Leningrad. But the third state farm was further
> out—about two hours. It was a weak farm. Wooden buildings. It lacked all
> conveniences. No central heating system. No sewage system. No running water.
> The greatest problem on all three was the lack of meat. There was almost none.
> As far as other food goes, the closer to Leningrad, the more the stores were
> selling. The further from Leningrad, the less they were selling. That was the
> rule. Apples you could get. But oranges, tangerines—only in Leningrad."[^6_16]

Why all these, and other, facades? Why erect elaborate governmental structures
that do not govern? Why the pretense of democracy? Why have extensive electoral
campaigns when the results of the election are a foregone conclusion? Why bother
to tally the votes when the electorate have no choice? Why have written
constitutions when they neither inhibit those who rule nor assure any benefits
to the ruled? Why would an atheist regime attempt to have a church serve as a
facade? Why does the regime maintain a facade of equality when everywhere great
inequities prevail? Why create model kindergartens, model state farms, model
collective farms, and even model prisons, as the Soviet Union does? In short,
why erect facade after facade at such tremendous effort and expense? Who are
these supposed to impress?

## To Impress Visitors

It is widely believed that these facades, as they are being called here, are
erected mainly to impress foreigners and conceal from them Soviet reality.
Undoubtedly, this is one of the reasons for which some of the facade building
takes place. For example the facade of freedom of religion presented by high
churchmen is clearly for foreign consumption. Surely, too, the facade of a
diplomatic service which conceals alien secret police is created for its effect
on foreigners. Model farms, and such like, probably have as one of their reasons
for being the impression of visitors to the Soviet Union.

It has always been important to the Soviet Union, too, to create a favorable
impression on foreigners (though often enough they have not succeeded in this).
The communist "experiment" was first undertaken on a large scale in Russia. A
Communist International was organized by Lenin to spread communism around the
world. The success of this movement would surely depend, to some extent, on at
least the apparent success of communism in Russia. If communism was to be "the
wave of the future," that future would surely need to look attractive if others
were to be drawn to it.

But why facades? Why not present the actuality of the Soviet Union to the world?
The answer to this question is so obvious, that it may have been unnecessary to
pose it: The Soviet "achievement" has not been such as would be likely to
favorably impress peoples from many parts of the world. The Soviet reality, at
its nether reaches, is such that it repels decent people. The Soviet Union could
only take a place among the governments of the world by creating a facade of
democracy, of constitutionality, and of having something like a parliamentary
system. If its gangster-like actions were not concealed by facades, it would be
incumbent on people generally to recognize it for what it is.

## For Home Consumption, The Illusion of Success

But the facades are not just for the benefit of foreigners. They are for the
inhabitants of the Soviet Union as well. How, it may be asked, can they be for
the people who are unlikely to be fooled for long as to the nature of the regime
and of conditions under which they live? It is possible, however, to be
impressed by facades even if one is not misled by them. Millions of Americans
have been thrilled, and horrified, by films about catastrophes even though they
know they are not witnessing actual catastrophes. It is impressive that the
Communist Party can garner an almost unanimous vote from the Russian electorate,
even though the election is rigged, so to speak. The creation of such elaborate
and extensive facades may be a more impressive demonstration of power than would
the feeding of the poor, say.

But these explanations are surface explanations. Underlying them are deeper
reasons which account for the continued, prolific, and pervasive facades.
Communism is a deception. Efforts to impose it can only be maintained by
erecting facade after facade. Facade is the natural fruit of deception.
Communist ideology cannot produce the freedom that it proclaims, the democracy
that it claims, the concerted effort that it seeks, nor the transformed man that
it wills. Marxian ideology, on which it is based, is a kind of poetic vision of
man, society, economics, and life which does not now, never did, and there is no
reason to believe ever will, exist. All the efforts to bring it into being
result in something quite different from what is sought. It is only possible to
create illusions that it works; these illusions we can experience as facades.

## A Conspiracy

Communism is not basically a social system, an economic system, or even a
political system; it is basically a *conspiracy.* It evinces itself to the world
as a conspiracy to gain, hold, and wield power to effect a great transformation.
But in its inwards, so to speak, it is a conspiracy to deceive and an agreement
to be deceived. It is, I say, a deception. Who does it deceive? The answer is
this: *Communism is a conspiracy to deceive all who need to be deceived by it.
*All who accept it, work to apply it, aid it in any way, or on whom it is being
imposed, need to be deceived. Even those most deeply involved in creating the
deception need to be deceived. Indeed, they have the greatest need to be
deceived, because they have the greatest need to believe in it.

The members of the Politburo, or Presidium, have the greatest need to be
deceived. They stand at the pinnacle of power in the Soviet Union because they
are the ones charged with the task and who are supposed to know how to usher in
communism. That it can be achieved is essential to their hold on power and
position. They need to believe that they are concerting all effort toward
achieving their goals. They need to believe that the workers, peasants, and
intellectuals are solidly behind them. They need to believe that religion is
dying out, that the young are committed to communism, and that communism is
conferring great benefits on the people. They need to believe, above all, that
socialism works and that they are approaching the final stage of communism.

## Fooling the Leaders

A situation is created for the top men that enables them very nearly to believe
all this. This is the role of the special privileges which they enjoy. They live
in and around Moscow which has the best of everything in Russia. And they have
the best of the best: the finest cars, the most exclusive dachas, the choicest
foods, the most sumptuous beach houses in the Crimea, and fly in the most modern
of jet planes. As Kaiser observes, "Privileges insulate those at the very top, a
tiny group of perhaps only two or three dozen men, from all the harassments and
discomforts of an ordinary citizen's life." "In sum," he says, "they live in a
contrived environment. Even their vodka is better than the ordinary
man's."[^6_17]

But there is much more to their contrived environment than these special
privileges. In a sense, most Russians are engaged in a giant conspiracy to prove
that socialism, or communism, works. The quotas of production that are supposed
to be filled are a part of that unwitting conspiracy. (Even prisoners in slave
labor camps learned to exaggerate their output in order to survive.) The shoddy
goods which are produced to fill quotas promote the conspiracy, for on the
statistical sheets viewed by the Politburo they are not described as shoddy. The
whole massive propaganda program enables those who will to believe in communism.

## Fooling the World

The need to be deceived spreads outward from the Politburo in concentric circles
to reach finally to the whole world. The members of the Party in the Soviet
Union need to be deceived, even as they are contriving to bring off the
deception. Communist parties around the world need to be deceived.
"Fellow-travelers" of the communist movement around the world need to be
deceived. Indeed, all who wish to be need to be deceived, and all who will make
sufficient effort can be. The whole paraphernalia of facades exists to assist
them in the effort.

Whether or not the deceivers are actually deceived by their deceptions is
somewhat beside the point. The point is that such a fabric of deception is
created, entailing a vast conspiracy to bring it off, that reality is
sufficiently distorted so as to make it difficult to determine what is real and
what not. When the truth is sufficiently distorted and obscured, men may believe
what they wish. The purpose of the deception is adequately achieved when those
who need to believe are enabled to do so by it. There is a human tendency,
communism aside, for men to believe what they want to believe. There is an even
stronger tendency for men to believe what they have a strong need to believe.

## Widespread Deception, Widespread Cynicism

Communists have built facade upon facade in the Soviet Union to assist any who
will, and all who need to, to believe that communism works and is the wave of
the future. Of course, one of the results of such widespread deception may be an
equally widespread cynicism.  The Soviet engineers, in the anecdote which opens
this article, could not believe that the huge number of automobiles outside the
Ford plant had not been assembled just to impress them. This meant also, of
course, that they did not believe many of the spectacles created in the Soviet
Union. But they pretend to believe them when they are at home, which may be
almost as useful as actually believing. Such pretense undoubtedly degrades them,
but degraded men are essential to corrupt systems. The success of the facades
depends upon a conspiracy of degraded men.

Behind the facades, however, is a grim and brutal reality. It is the reality of
terror on which the power of the rulers of the Soviet Union rests, a terror so
extensive that for many years those who tried to tell the world of it were not
believed.

Next: 7. *The Reign of Terror.*

[^6_1]: Leopold Tyrmand, *Notebooks of a Dilettante* (New York: Macmillan,
  1970), pp. 85-87.

[^6_2]: Arthur J. May, *Europe Since 1939* (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
  Winston, 1966), p. 193.

[^6_3]: Alfred G. Meyer, *The Soviet Political System* (New York: Random House,
  1965), p. 199.

[^6_4]: Merle Fainsod, *How Russia is Ruled* (Cambridge: Harvard University
  Press, 1963), p. 353.

[^6_5]: *Ibid.,* p. 367.

[^6_6]: *lbid.,* pp. 384-85.

[^6_7]: Oleg Penkovskiy, *The Penkovskiy Papers* (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
  1965), p. 66.

[^6_8]: Hedrick Smith, *The Russians* (New York: Quadrangle, 1976), p.
  436.

[^6_9]: Robert G. Kaiser, *Russia* (New York: Atheneum, 1976), p. 105.

[^6_10]: Ibid., p. 106.

[^6_11]: *Hearing, *House Committee on Un-American Activities, August 10, 1967
  (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967), p. 535.

[^6_12]: Kaiser, *op. cit.,* p. 105.

[^6_13]: Leopold Tyrmand, *The Rosa Luxemburg Contraceptive Cooperative* (New
  York: Macmillan, 1972), p. 80.

[^6_14]: *Ibid.,* pp. 82-83.

[^6_15]: Kaiser, *op. cit.,* p. 176.

[^6_16]: Smith, *op. cit.,* p. 204.

[^6_17]: Kaiser, *op. cit.,* pp. 177-78.

