# World in the Grip of an Idea: 7. Russia - The Reign of Terror

[Friday, July 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/july-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

Terror is Soviet Communism's substitute for law. It is not an accident that it
is a substitute; it is not a whim of those who rule; it does not arise simply
from the love of power. Terror is as essential to communism as oxygen is to
fire. Its essentiality, its necessity, arises from the nature of things. The
necessity for it is, if you will, ontological and metaphysical, lying at the
core of how things are and the way they can be here on this earth. (*How much*
terror is necessary is an entirely different matter; it is, in any case, a
question for tyrants to debate.)

Karl Marx professed to believe that when private property was abolished the
state would wither away. The available evidence indicates that Marx erred, that
far from disappearing the state expands and grows luxuriously until it occupies
every nook and cranny of the life of a people when private property is
abolished. Marx's insight was off the mark. It is not the state which withers
away when property is abolished, but law, and liberty, and private rights, and
justice.

True, theorists of communism thought that the need for law would disappear as
the revolution moved to its fruition. This would, however, occur simultaneously
with the withering away of the state, or, at least, as a part of the same
process. Law, according to Marxism, is a product of the class struggle. It is
the means by which the ruling class imposes its will on all the rest. The state
is the device which effects the imposition. The Bolshevik Revolution did indeed
sunder ancient relationships between the state (and the government within it),
property, law, and private rights. It sundered them sufficiently to reveal some
connections which could have been known theretofore mainly by speculation. The
Soviet experience should serve as a rich mine for political theory, but it can
only do so by being separated from Marxian theory.

## Law and Property Rights

The major conclusion to be drawn from the Soviet experience is this: Law is
neither essential to nor derived from the power of the state. On the contrary,
law is an impediment to the exercise of governmental power. Government operates
essentially by the use of force. The state is the territory within which a
government has a monopoly of the use of force, at least within its jurisdiction.
Law regularizes and *limits* the use of force by government. It limits it by
prescribing how force shall be used, to what extent, and under what conditions.
Law is no more necessary to governments than handcuffs would be to a boxer.

Law arises from and depends on property rights. All rights are extensions of
property rights. This has been the case historically. Freedom of speech, of
press, and of religion, for example, were only established after the foundation
had been laid in rights to private property. This course of events was not
accidental; it was essential. The law can protect only what it can define.
Freedom of speech is a property right to one's utterances, depending for its use
upon a place (property) from which to speak, and upon its defense for the means
by which to enter into an adversary relationship with those (including
government) who would deny it. Abolish private property, and you abolish all
rights and liberties with it. Law can no more survive without these rights in
property than can a building be suspended from sky hooks. Neither has any
foundation.

## The Alternative Is Terror

Government requires neither private property nor law in order to function. They
are inhibitions on its exercise of force.  There is for government an
alternative to law; it is terror. Government must act by law or by terror, or a
combination of these two means. In the absence of private property and its
corollary, law, government must act by terror. The exercise of force without the
restraint of law is terror. No better definition can be given, and none is
needed. It does not become terror because of the horrible character of the acts;
every use of force is terroristic because it is arbitrary, unpredictable, and
has no certain cause or explanation. None may know when force will be applied or
when it will be halted, for there are no enforceable restraints.

The Soviet Union is a lawless nation at bottom. There is, of course, a facade of
law. There are rules for the bureaucracy; there are statutes to apply to the
populace; there is a constitution, have been several constitutions; and there is
a system of courts. But these are all facade, because those who rule are unbound
by them. They are unbound because the Russian people have no means for making
them observe the law. They have no means because they have no private property,
or so little that it is grossly insufficient for the task. They have no property
because of communism. The lawlessness and terror derive from communism; they are
its inevitable corollary. The extent of the terror depends upon the particular
ruler; the necessity for terror, per se, arises from communism.

## Stages of Soviet Rule

The history of the Soviet Union can be divided into episodes according to the
degree, extent, and quality of terror by which it has been ruled. The first
episode was that of War Communism from 1918 into 1921, a period of extensive
terror and Draconian measures in behalf of revolutionary activity and the defeat
of the White forces. The next episode was that of the New Economic Policy (NEP)
which lasted from about 1921 to 1928.  There is no doubt that the terror abated
during this period. Much private economic activity was permitted; commercial
laws were enacted; and some protections to private property were enforced.

The next episode properly encompasses the whole period of the personal rule of
Joseph Stalin, 1928-1953, a period of 25 years of the most extensive and
intensive reign of terror in all of history. The Stalinist terror can itself be
broken into episodes—forced collectivization, forced industrialization, the
Great Purge, and so on—, but this would only involve distinctions based on the
character of the victims not upon the extent of the terror.

Following Stalin's death, particularly during Nikita Khrushchev's middle period,
so to speak, 1956-early 1960's, there was a dramatic abatement of the terror, a
widescale freeing of political prisoners, and even some revelation of the extent
of Stalin's terror. This does not mean Khrushchev's reign was lawful, only less
terror-filled. The indications are that Leonid Brezhnev has restored much of the
secretive atmosphere of Stalin as well as a modified terror.

## Always, Terror

One thing should be made clear: Every Communist regime in the Soviet Union has
employed terror. All have used the secret police who were an instrument of the
rule of terror, whose names have been changed over the years but not their
character. All have been lawless in that none has been prevented from acting
because it was against the law. No single instance has come to light of a member
of the secret police being prosecuted for terrorist acts against the citizenry.
Khrushchev reported some of the crimes of Stalin, but those who conspired with
Stalin were not brought to justice.

The purpose of the terror in the Soviet Union is not primarily to maintain what
in the United States is sometimes called law and order. This helps to explain
the great variations in the degree, extent, and quality of the terror. If it
were aimed at punishing or suppressing what is ordinarily called crime, there
would be little reason to expect any great variation. After all, crimes against
persons and property may increase or diminish over the years, but they do not
ordinarily change much from one ruler to the next. In any case, ordinary
crime—crimes against persons, such as assault, and theft of personal
property—does not greatly excite the Soviet authorities. Most property belongs
to the state, and theft or abuse of it is a political crime. "Political" crime
is that against which the terror is waged. There is abundant testimony, even,
that ordinary criminals are permitted, and probably intentionally used, to
terrorize the political prisoners in prisons and slave labor camps.

## An Ideological Weapon

Terror, then, is an ideological weapon. It is the main device used in the
attempt to impose communism on the Russian people. A most important conclusion
follows from this: The extent of the terror is in direct proportion to the
effort being made to impose communism. The facts tend to support this
conclusion. In the 1920's, under the New Economic Policy, there was an abatement
of the terror. It is generally understood that the New Economic Policy was a
conscious retreat, albeit temporary, from socialism or communism. Such
restoration of private enterprise in trade, farming, and small manufactures as
was made was admittedly a step backward.

Then, in 1928 Stalin began the "Great Leap Forward" with the initiation of his
first Five Year Plan. Forced industrialization and forced collectivization were
undertaken on an unprecedented scale. This was accompanied by such terrorism as
had hardly been experienced before. Eugene Lyons has summarized the impact of
this undertaking in the following manner:

> The plan was launched like a war of conquest directed against the whole
> population….
>
> In a mystic transport of "historic mission," the regime doomed millions to
> extinction, tens of millions to thinly disguised slavery, the whole nation to
> incredible suffering. Upon the alleged "completion" and "fulfillment" of the
> plan, half the country was caught in a fearful famine, the other half was on
> short rations, agriculture was wrecked, the forced-labor population in camps
> was nearing the ten-million mark….[^7_1]

This particular interlude had many dimensions of terror, some of which would not
be repeated, at least not on this scale. The most horrendous persecution was of
the kulaks (small farmers) NEPmen (those engaged in private enterprise during
the period of the New Economic Policy). These were disfranchised, deprived of
their possessions, and, as Lyons says, "denied food rations and the right to
schooling, driven from their homes, employed only as unskilled… labor, or simply
left to beg and starve and die."[^7_2] This was clearly ideological, an attempt
to wipe out all vestiges of private enterprise. Clearly, too, the efforts at
industrialization and collectivization were in accord with communist ideology.
(The debate about whether Stalin's methods were the best way to proceed are of
interest only to those who believe that it can and ought somehow to be done.)
The terror mounted as the attempt to impose the ideology was pursued.

## Changes Since Stalin

It is important to grasp this point, because since the De-Stalinization of the
late 1950's there has been a widespread effort to treat the Stalin terror as an
aberration. Stalin was not, according to this view, a good communist. He reveled
in the Personality Cult built around him, and terror was his device for
concentration of all power in his hands.

Now it may well be that Stalin contrived a personality cult, and there can be no
doubt that he consolidated all power in his hands, but it does not follow that
he was not a good communist. On the contrary, if the analysis and facts here
presented are accepted, Stalin stands out as the best communist ever to emerge
in the Soviet Union. He applied terror more rigorously and thoroughly than has
ever been done, before or since. He did so in accord with the logic of communist
ideology. His crimes were not an aberration from communism; they were the
product of his attempt to impose it.

The ideological purpose of terror is to produce conformity with the Communist
Party line. More broadly, the purpose is to bring a whole people under the sway
of the ideology, to make them instruments to be used in a common concerted
effort. If this is to be accomplished, all dissent must be wiped out, and all
individual resistance must be crushed. "You cannot make an omelet without
breaking eggs," Khrushchev said. Terror is the communist way to break eggs, and
Stalin was its supreme exemplar.

At any rate, by the early 1930's the terror began to fall into a pattern. It
would not be correct to say that it was regularized, for that would suggest that
there were rules which limited and made it predictable. It was never predictable
for it was too arbitrary for that. Nor was it ever ritualized.  Amongst
civilized peoples many acts are ritualized, and especially those that have to do
with life and death and detention. Communism discourages all ritual and tends to
leave all acts as blunt and unembellished as possible. But there was a pattern
to the terror.

## First, the Arrest

Ordinarily, the first step is the arrest. It can happen at any time and any
place. Alexander Dolgun, an American who spent about eight years in Soviet
prisons and camps, was walking down a street in Moscow in the middle of the day
when he was arrested. For others it came at home, in the middle of the night or
whenever. Mothers of small children might be taken away with no provision made
for looking after the children. There might be a search of the premises for
papers or other incriminating evidence. Most likely, no charge would be made at
the time of the arrest. The person might well be told that he was only being
taken in for a little talk or questioning. The arresting officers would be men
in plain clothes, members of the NKVD, MVD, MGB, KGB, or whatever name the
secret police would be using at the time.

The second step is to be taken to a prison in the vicinity of where one is
arrested. The terror begins there, if it had not already begun. This is no
ordinary prison, if there is such a thing. It is a place of interrogation, and
the facilities are designed to bring maximum psychological and physical pressure
to break the prisoner and make him confess. The terror may begin in this prison,
but it does not end there, unless it ends in death. The terror settles upon the
prisoner, as it were, rending his soul and marking him for life. (Not everyone
is as sensitive as Alexsandr Solzhenitsyn, but witness the Herculean effort he
has made to tell the story to the world, in fictionalized accounts and in
histories.)

## Imprisonment

Jail is bad enough in the best of times and places. The initial experience is
one of helplessness, of loss of control over one's affairs, of being at the
mercy of his captors. There are all sorts of things one knows he has to do, and
yet his life is stopped, thrown into limbo, as it were.  One may be buoyed at
first by outraged innocence and the delusion that it is all a mistake. But in a
Soviet prison all these must yield to something else, the necessity of clinging
to sanity and the relics of selfness. All imprisonment involves loss of status
and loss of respect of one's former fellows. Yes, even in the Soviet Union, the
thought will not down that one must have done something to incur the wrath of
the authorities, though for those who know better among endangered acquaintances
or family there may be a sense of outrage that the person was so stupid as to
get himself arrested.

As soon as the fact of one's being arrested and imprisoned becomes known, the
terror, or fear, spreads to his family and acquaintances. The odds have now
increased that they will suffer a similar fate. Alexander Dolgun's mother was
arrested:

> They had arrested her in 1950. For months she had pestered the MGB (it was
> still MGB then) for news of me. At first they told her I had been shot as a
> spy. She had a breakdown. Shortly after she recovered she got my triangle
> letter from Kuibyshev, in which I asked whether the American Embassy had given
> her my personal belongings. She went to the embassy to demand help. At the
> gates the MGB arrested her. She was still emotionally very fragile. They beat
> her with rubber truncheons, trying to get her to incriminate me. They pushed
> needles under her fingernails. Now her nails would never be straight again.
> After a very short period of this she went quite insane and, without
> sentencing her, they put her in a prison insane asylum in Ryazan.[^7_3]

When she was released from the asylum, she could get no help from the
authorities to get a place to live, reclaim her property or maintain herself
because she had not been sentenced. Dolgun's father, too, had been imprisoned.
Perhaps saddest of all, after Alexander Dolgun had been released and was living
with his mother, the state of her mind was such that at times she believed him
to be in the hire of the secret police and informing on her. There is no end to
the terror.

The purpose of the initial imprisonment and interrogation is to extract a
*satisfactory* confession from the prisoner. He will be interrogated for as
short or as long a time as is needed to get the confession, or goes insane or
dies from the tortures inflicted upon him. The usual method of getting a
prisoner to confess is to put him on the conveyor, as it is called. The conveyor
is a system of extended interrogation carried on by relays of interrogators,
usually at night, broken by interludes of "rest" during the day in which the
prisoner is not allowed to lie down or sleep. One careful student of the process
describes it this way:

> Interrogation usually took place at night and with the accused just
> roused—often only fifteen minutes after going to sleep. The glaring lights at
> the interrogation had a disorienting effect. There was a continual emphasis on
> the absolute powerlessness of the victim. The interrogators—or so it usually
> seemed—could go on indefinitely.

As one prisoner described the result:

> After two or three weeks, I was in a semi-conscious state. After fifty or
> sixty interrogations with cold and hunger and almost no sleep, a man becomes
> like an automaton—his eyes are bright, his legs swollen, his hands trembling.
> In this state he is often even convinced he is guilty.[^7_4]

## Obtaining Confession

Most men, and women, probably crumble within a few days and provide the desired
confession. If they do not, or cannot (for it is by no means easy to determine
what to confess), they may be subjected to other tortures as well as or in
addition to that of the conveyor. The tortures may be simple or exquisite; an
interrogator may suddenly jump up and begin to beat the prisoner with his fists.
They may be as simple as feeding a prisoner salt fish and allowing him no water
for a day, or as exquisite as placing him in a room with water covering the
floor and no place to sit. A present-day Soviet writer tells this poignant story
of the torture of a woman (in a book that had to be published outside the Soviet
Union ):

> Nestor Lakoba, poisoned by Beria and posthumously declared an "enemy of the
> people," left a wife who would not sign any false statements about him. A
> young and beautiful woman, rumored to be a Georgian princess, she was arrested
> and put in the Tbilisi prison soon after her husband's death. Nutsa
> Gogoberidze, the wife of Levan Gogoberidze, who shared a cell with Lakoba's
> wife, tells how this silent and calm woman was taken away every evening and
> was dragged back to the cell, bloody and unconscious. The women cried, asked
> for a doctor and revived her. When she came to, she told how they demanded
> that she sign an essay on the subject "How Lakoba sold Abkhazia to Turkey."
> Her reply was brief: "I will not defame the memory of my husband." She stood
> fast even when faced with the ultimate torture: her fourteen-year old son was
> shoved crying toward his mother, and she was told he would be killed if she
> did not sign. (And this threat… was carried out.) But even then Lakoba's wife
> would not defame her husband. Finally, after a night of torture, she died in
> her cell.[^7_5]

Most people are not, of course, cut out of such a heroic mold, and the
interrogator was not often denied the confession he sought.

## Confess What?

What would be a satisfactory confession? Anyone innocent of knowledge of the
Soviet secret police, and their masters, might suppose that what was wanted was
a confession in accord with the facts. But this was usually unnecessary and
unwanted. The aim of the interrogators was not facts at all in the accepted
sense of something that has happened and can be verified by independent data.
Facts belong to the real world of happenings and events. What they wanted
belongs to a posited, an imaginary, a mentally constructed world in accord with
communist ideology and the Party line.

The most grotesque facade of all in Soviet Communism was the facade erected from
the tissue of these confessions. It was a facade compounded of assassination
plots, of foreign controlled spy networks, of domestic conspiracies, of
industrial sabotage, of agricultural espionage, of fascist traitors, of "right
wing deviationists," of "left wing deviationists," of Trotskyists, and so on.
The picture that emerges from the confessions is a massive intertwined series of
conspiracies and plots to undermine, thwart, and destroy Communism in Russia.
Millions of people were supposed to be involved, and many nations around the
world were aiding and abetting it. All other conspiracy theories pale beside
this one, for none other can produce millions of confessions to "prove" its
case.

## A Documented Rationale for Soviet Actions

This facade of confessions constituted a huge "documented" rationale for Soviet
actions and failures. The terror had the broad purpose of subduing the people
and making them conform to the will of their rulers as well as the narrower
purpose of producing confessions. But the confessions, we may believe, had a
different purpose—to justify the regime to itself and to such others as were
apprized of the "evidence." Was there a crop failure in some province? The
explanation was at hand: saboteurs had provided rotten seed or the fertilizer
had been tampered with. Did a factory fail to meet its quota? Saboteurs must
have been at work there. In the Show Trials of the 1930's a man named Pyatakov
made this confession:

> In the Ukraine the work was carried on mainly in the coke industry by Loginov
> and a group of persons connected with him. Their work, in the main, consisted
> of starting coke ovens which were not really ready for operations, and of
> holding up the construction of very valuable and very important parts of the
> coke and chemical industry….
>
> The wrecking activities in the last period assumed new forms. Despite the fact
> that, after a delay of two or three years, the plant began to enter on its
> operation stage Maryasin created intolerable conditions, fomented intrigues,
> and in a word everything to obstruct operation.[^7_6]

Even the terror itself might be "justified" by these conspiracies and plots. The
government, it was made to appear, was vigilantly capturing and punishing its
enemies. Indeed, the secret police could provide signed confessions of any sort
of wrongdoing which the rulers ordered. The number of people who could be
implicated was limited only by the number of secret policemen who could be
assigned to getting confessions.

Once a confession had been extracted, one along the desired lines, the next step
was to sentence the prisoner. He could be sentenced in one of two ways: after a
trial or by the "organs," i.e., the secret police. So far as the question of
guilt or innocence was concerned, it did not matter which way was taken. In
fact, there was never any question of guilt or innocence once a person had been
arrested. He was guilty. The only question was, of what?

## The Farce of a Trial

The trials that were held were farcical. Their lack of dignity was apparent
during the Moscow Show Trials when Andrei Vyshinsky, the Chief Prosecutor, would
howl to the court, "Shoot the dirty dog," or words to that effect. If a defense
lawyer appeared, his effectiveness was sullied by the necessity for him to show
his loyalty to the government. Even the sentences must have been prepared in
advance of the trial. Robert Conquest points out that the trial of Evgenia
Ginzburg took seven minutes. "The Court returned in two minutes with a 'verdict'
which she estimates must have taken twenty minutes to type.”[^7_7]

The only real question to be answered by the sentencing was whether the prisoner
was to be shot or sent for a number of years to a forced labor camp. True, the
length of sentences varied, but whether it was for five, ten, or twenty-five
years mattered less than it should have, for the "organs" could add an
additional sentence when the first was completed if they saw fit. An important
point to be grasped here is that once a prisoner had made, signed, and, if he
was to be publicly tried, given, his confession, his purpose had been served.
He became a nonperson, a thing, to be disposed of in whatever way the
authorities might decide.

If he was to be shot, the sentence was usually carried out summarily. He was,
according to lore, escorted to some dungeon room by secret police and shot in
the back of the neck. No ceremony was involved; it was economical and effective.
The price was the cost of a bullet, and a well-placed single shot severs the
spinal column at the neck, bringing an end to sensation and probably instant
death. Torture would have been superfluous at this point, since a confession had
already been obtained, so the prisoner was simply dispatched in the most
expeditious way.

## Forced Labor Camps

Those send to forced labor camps were almost certainly sentenced to a fate worse
than death. It might be more accurate to say that in most cases they were
sentenced to a fate worse than, as well as, death.  The vast majority died,
according to such testimony as we have, en route to or in the camps. What could
happen en route to a camp was vividly told by a Pole, Andrey A. Stotski, who was
a Soviet prisoner during World War II. There were 1,400 prisoners when they set
out on their journey to the far frozen north. A long portion of the journey was
in the hold of a barge. They were fed, when and as they were, by bread and soup
lowered into the hold on hooks. These same hooks were used to lift those who
died to the topside where they could be dumped into the sea. Let him take up the
account:

> The deaths were so frequent by this time that the guards left the hooks within
> our reach, so that all we had to do was fasten them into the body and jerk the
> ropes hard. Among the last victims was one from our number—one of the White
> Ruthenians. From our memories of a life that was now an eternity away, we
> recalled the prayers for the dead and commended to God this soul who had
> surely gone to Him. How we envied this man whose troubles were now over. And
> yet none of us could bring our will to the point of suicide. No, death would
> have to come when God pleased.[^7_8]

Seven hundred twenty-seven of the 1400 who had begun the journey survived this
voyage. They then began the walk to the mines. On the way, they stopped for a
while in a barracks, some fifty of their number were unable to continue the
journey. "Before we were well away," he says, "the sound of pistol shots, at
deliberately measured brief intervals, reached us."[^7_9] They had been shot.
About 400 eventually reached the camp.

The transfer from prison to forced labor camp was from torture to torment. There
were at least two dimensions to this torment. One was psychological, and, if
possible, it was the worst because of its impact on the human spirit.

The necessary environment to human dignity, even to humanness, is the sense that
the individual has worth, that life has meaning, that each of us is important.
The graces of culture and the outworks of civilization combine to support the
belief that each individual is of great worth. The newborn baby is surrounded by
attendants; the father has waited anxiously for the birth; relatives are eager
to know its sex, weight, height, and who it looks like. The infant is given a
name, staking out its individuality and uniqueness, as it were. Family and
friends tend to provide the necessary warmth for nurturing human dignity. When a
child becomes a man, he usually attains additional support from his job or
position for his status as a valuable person. Even in death, the importance of
the individual is celebrated by the commemorative services: the assembly of
friends and loved ones, the expressions of grief and condolences, the rituals of
burial, and the marking of the spot where the body has been placed. All this, of
course, helps to reassure the living of the worth of the individual.

## Stripped of Dignity

The forced labor camps stripped away every remnant of support to human dignity,
except such as the most resolute could store in their hearts. "Life is
meaningless," the forced labor camps seemed to say, "An individual is of no
account." Solzhenitsyn has called the camps "Our Sewage Disposal Systems." This
human garbage, these pitiful human beings, squeezed dry by torture and
confession, were shipped off to remote areas to remove them from the sight and
smell of others who were, relatively, alive and free. Everything in the camps
confirmed that the prisoners were garbage: the language of the guards, the
tattered rags the prisoners wore, the absence of amenities, and the cheapness of
life. Tales abound of prisoners being shot merely because they stepped out of
line in a formation or could not keep up.

Here is a story that reveals the assault on life in the camps. A prisoner made a
dash for freedom. Other prisoners wanted to run after him and persuade him to
return, but the guards would not permit it. Then, a guard by the name of Vanya
took off across the ice and snow in a sleigh pulled by seven dogs in an effort
to capture the man. The prisoner did not last long, for he was emaciated, and he
had fallen to the ground by the time Vanya reached him. He was tied to the sled
and dragged back to camp. Though he was horribly torn and bleeding, he was still
alive. Vanya unleashed a vicious dog named Nora, expecting that she would tear
at and destroy the man:

> Nora rose and slowly and cautiously approached the wretch on the ground, while
> all of us held our breath. The beast sniffed all around him and then opened
> wide her terrible mouth, and with her long, rough tongue began to lick Sasha's
> bleeding body. Finally she lay down by the remains of the man, pushing up
> close to him as if to protect him from the cold.
>
> Vanya cursed and went off without a word. Somebody among the prisoners began
> to sob. Nora pushed still closer to what had once been a man.[^7_10]

Brutes, of course, are incapable of evil, for they know no such distinctions.
Man, however, is, and the greatest evil is to attempt to deprive life of its
meaning.

In these circumstances, men grasp for something that will supply meaning. The
Reverend Richard Wurmbrand has told in one of his books how men greedily
gathered around anyone who could remember and quote Scriptures, for they were
indeed "Wonderful Words of Life." Alexander Dolgun relates how he survived in a
cell dominated by regular criminals—the most brutal of all—by his ability to
recall the plots to movies. We can surmise that what was of such importance to
stories, aside from their value as entertainment, was that one could glean from
them some glimmer of life with meaning.

A Polish woman prisoner in a Soviet camp tells how she was approached one day by
one of the most vicious and cruel girls in the camp. This conversation ensued:

> "Listen, you Polish lady, now that we are alone, tell me—" she hesitated,
> looking around to see that we were really alone. "I saw you, and I know you
> pray. Tell me, is there a God?"
>
> My grip relaxed on the bucket. [She had been prepared to defend herself.]
> "There is."
>
> "How do you know?"
>
> "Because I pray every day and God does take care of me…."
>
> "Tell me," she began again. "Tell me, what is it like in your country?… Is
> life in your country different from ours here? Is it true that people can
> really enjoy life there?"
>
> "It is true, Katiushka," and I described to her what life was like in Poland.
> [This was Pre-Communist Poland.]
>
> "You see," she sighed wearily when I stopped speaking, "I, too, would so like
> to have enjoyed life—to enjoy life!"[^7_11]

The other source of torment in the camps was the work and accompanying hunger
and debilitation. The economy of the forced labor camps was a grotesque parody
of the dismal science, economics, as conceived by Malthus and Ricardo and
revised by Marx. The natural price of labor, Ricardo had said, is the cost of
subsistence. These prison camps went much further: they attempted to squeeze the
maximum "surplus value" from these wretches by denying the necessities for
subsistence to all except those who could meet the most unrealistic quotas of
production. Thus, men endured cold, hunger, disease, lack of meaning, and faced
eventual death in fruitless efforts to meet quotas. In some occupations, such as
logging in the far frozen north, death came to most workers rather quickly.
Those who survived the camps were apt to do so because they managed somehow to
get the easiest jobs.

## The Value of Private Property

There is much to be learned from the experiences of men in such extreme
conditions. One is the great value of private property. Prisoners had no private
property, in the sense that the authorities could be depended on to protect it,
but they did have a few pitiful possessions. These they treated as private
property and protected by whatever means they could. Solzhenitsyn describes the
watch over possessions in this way:

> … In the evening, when you lay down on the naked panel, you could take off
> your shoes. But take into consideration that your shoes would be swiped.
> Better sleep with shoes on. Better not scatter your clothes about
> either—they'd swipe them too. On going out to work in the morning you must not
> leave anything in the barracks; whatever the thieves did not bother to take
> the jailers would, announcing, "It's forbidden!" In the morning you would go
> out to work just as nomads depart from a camp site, leaving it even cleaner….
>
> But you couldn't cart anything off to work with you either. You would gather
> up your chattels in the morning, stand in line at the storeroom for personal
> belongings, and hide them in a bag or a suitcase. You'd return from work and
> stand in line again at the storeroom and take with you what you could foresee
> you would want overnight….[^7_12]

Those who have never known such extremities have sometimes supposed that
property rights are secondary to others. But when men are deprived of all except
the relics of property, they cling to these as the last hope against total
deprivation and death. Any property that one has is also a toehold on the way to
reclaiming dignity, meaning, all other rights, legality, and liberty itself.

This, then, was the reign of terror. It is often said nowadays that the Soviet
regime is a stable one. If it is, it is testimonial to the effectiveness of
terror in producing stability. We come much nearer to the truth, however, when
we view it as a lawless regime ruled over by gangsters in the service of
ideology. Stability means only that the people are subdued.

The impact of the terror on the prisoners has been examined. It is now in order
to explore the effect on the population in general.

Next: *8. Russia : Impotent Populace and Massive State.*

[^7_1]: Eugene Lyons, *Worker's Paradise Lost* (New York: Twin Circle, 1967),
  pp. 137-38.

[^7_2]: *lbid.,* p. 148.

[^7_3]: Alexander Dolgun with Patrick Watson, *Alexander Dolgun's Story: An
  American in the Gulag* (New York: Ballantine, 1975), p. 446.

[^7_4]: Robert Conquest, *The Great Terror* (Toronto: Macmillan, 1968), pp.
  140-41.

[^7_5]: Roy A. Medvedev, *Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of
  Stalinism* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971), p. 269.

[^7_6]: Conquest, *op. cit.,* pp. 167-68.

[^7_7]: *Ibid.,* p. 311.

[^7_8]: lsaac Don Levine, *Plain Talk* (New Rochelle: Arlington House, 1976), p.
263.

[^7_9]: *Ibid,* p. 266.

[^7_10]: *Ibid.,* p. 273.

[^7_11]: *Ibid.,* pp. 289-90.

[^7_12]: Alexsandr I. Solzhenitsyn, *The Gulag Archipelago Two* (New York:
  Harper &amp; Row, 1975), p. 171.

