# World in the Grip of an Idea: 8. Russia - Impotent Populace and Massive State

[Monday, August 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/august-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

The ordinary methods and language of scholarship are inadequate for and
inappropriate to the examination and assessment of Soviet Communism. Some
examples may illustrate the point. According to most accounts, the Soviet Union
is now one of the leading industrial nations in the world. In fact, the Soviet
Union has long been the leading exporter of communist ideology in the world.
The few products it can sell on the world market are offered in support of the
ideology. On the other hand, it must surely be the leading importer of
scientific and technological information. It has had the most diligent crew of
researchers and translators of scientific, medical, and technological journals
from other lands of any country in the world. What is the balance of trade? Not
even those trained in the new mathematics could compute the balance from the
export of ideology and the import of scientific information.

A country which can only dispose of its shoddy merchandise by erecting barriers
to keep other goods out and prevent its inhabitants from going elsewhere to shop
should not be styled a leading industrial nation. (One of the considerable joys
of those who can take a trip to Western Europe or America is the opportunity to
go shopping. Those fortunate enough to be able to go abroad are usually besieged
by friends to make purchases for them while they are there.) It should be called
a leading jailer nation.

A nation which exports is communist ideology and imports scientific information
no more has a balance of trade than does a sprig of mistletoe attached to the
limb of a tree. It is a parasite. The language of political science is only a
hindrance in describing elections in which there is only one candidate, or
constitutions whose guarantees of freedom of religion only serve the power of
government in launching a massive campaign against religion. Such terms as
"fraud," "deception," and "cruel joke" serve all too well. Legal scholars are
superfluous to the study of trials in which the penalty has already been
determined. The paraphernalia of scholarship, when applied to the Soviet Union,
tends to conceal what is going on rather than expose it.

## Maladjusted Individuals

Zhores Medvedev, a Russian biologist, was seized by Soviet police in 1970 and
locked up in a mental institution. The diagnosis described him as being unable
to adjust to the social environment, as suffering from reformist delusions, and
as having an exaggerated sense of his own importance. Medvedev suggests, in a
book about his experience, that by the criteria applied to him certain important
personages must have been in much worse condition than he was. While he
prudently avoids naming them, since he was still in Russia, it is clear that he
was talking about Stalin and Khrushchev. He says:

> Take, for example, that outstanding figure [Stalin] whom we all remember so
> well as an economist, a military leader, philosopher, statesman and diplomat.
> And suddenly out of the blue he publishes his article on the problems of
> linguistics and personally begins to introduce tangerine and eucalyptus trees
> to the Crimea. Then there was that other great leader [Khrushchev], also wise
> politician, diplomat, economist, agricultural specialist and historian of the
> Party. Suddenly he begins to make decisions about the architecture of
> apartment houses, arbitrates in a disagreement between two schools of
> genetics..., forbids the private ownership of cattle in the countryside and
> teaches writers the secrets of their craft. And of each of them it was true to
> say that they were proud, expressed themselves dogmatically and were convinced
> of the supreme value and infallibility of their views. Of course eucalyptus
> trees never got accustomed to the Crimea and maize doesn't grow in the North,
> but the behavior of both of these men continued to be determined by the nature
> of their delusions without adapting to reality.
>
> The behavior of one of them [Stalin] was further aggravated by persecution
> mania and sadism—which led him to spend a lot of time "discovering" imaginary
> conspiracies, introducing draconian laws, organizing mass arrests, executions
> and tortures, and he was conpletely isolated in a world of his own.[^8_1]

It was not, I take it, Medvedev's point that either Stalin or Khrushchev was
insane, though he presents some strong evidence to that effect against Stalin.
Rather, he wished to demonstrate that any delusions he might have were puny and
dwarfed by the mammoth ones of these two leaders. (He might have added the
delusions of Lenin and Brezhnev to the others, but he had risked enough already.
Even though Stalin and Khrushchev are dead and in some ways discredited, it is
not possible to know in what ways they may be safely attacked. But Lenin is a
sort of god, and Brezhnev is alive and in command.) But by calling attention to
their delusions he does provide an angle from which to begin the assessment of
Soviet Communism.

## Marxist Delusions

The delusions of Soviet leaders arise from communist ideology. Marxism is a
fantasy. Karl Marx had the delusion that he had discovered the secret of
history. His notion about the inevitable triumph of the proletariat is no more
scientific than is the belief that the position of the planets controls our
destiny. Yet his ideology provided the foundation for Lenin's delusion that the
moment for the revolution had arrived in Russia, and from thence it should
spread to the rest of the world. The delusion gave men the effrontery to attempt
to impose the ideology on everyone within their power.

There is a crucial distinction between the delusions associated with insanity
and those born of ideology. The insane person suffers from or is afflicted with
his delusions. By contrast, it is those on whom ideological delusions are
imposed that suffer. Marx did not suffer from his delusions, nor did Lenin, nor
did Stalin, nor did Khrushchev, but a goodly portion of the peoples of the world
have. Another distinction between ideological delusions and those of insanity is
that the insane cannot function effectively in their environment. Ideologues,
again, can function effectively, but they inhibit those on whom the ideology is
imposed from acting very effectively.

The perverse effects of these delusions are to be accounted for by the
assumptions and presumptions of the ideology. Karl Marx had what may best be
described as a criminal mind. Not the mind of a petty thief, of course. Not even
the mind of those who are ordinarily thought of as directing organized crime. He
had a cosmic criminal mind.

## Theft, through Revolution

The crime which Marx contemplated was theft, the theft of all property used in
the production and distribution of goods. The method by which the property was
to be taken he called Revolution. The cohorts who would assist in this
enterprise—the proletariat—would be rewarded by receiving the fruits of
production. Thus far, his scheme paralleled just about any plan for carrying out
a robbery. But Marx added two dimensions to theft or crime which they do not
ordinarily have. First, he declared that this act of universal robbery—the World
Revolution—was inevitable. Second, he conceived an ideology which was supposed
to justify this vast thievery. He wove the whole into the framework of an
anti-religious religion.

The universal plunder which Marx prescribed was, of course, to be only a
prelude, a necessary prelude to universal justice, peace, harmony, well-being,
and freedom. Man was to be emancipated from all the constraints that had kept
his true nature from emerging. He was to be transformed, following upon the
transformation of the economy, and a new society would emerge. The eventual end
would justify the plunderous means, though Marx held that the
expropriation—plunder, thievery, robbery, or whatever it should be called—was
also justified. Marx laid down no specifics for the emergence of this new
society and new man. Presumably they would emerge naturally once the
expropriation had been completed and the means of production were in the hands
of the "workers."

If theft can be justified, then all other crimes are justified thereby: torture,
slavery, extortion, compulsion, murder, fraud, threats, assault, and every
species of restraint. If stealing is justified, nay, required, by the laws of
history, then all resistance to theft must be met with whatever force is
necessary to overcome it. The force to overcome the resistance to the robbery
must be as great as, no, greater than, all the energy which men will put forth
to cling to their possessions.

## Emphasis on Ownership

It is not simply that man has an affinity for property, though he has; it is
even more the case that property has an affinity for man, so to speak. To put it
more directly, property must be owned before it realizes its potential as
property. Property without ownership is an abstraction, an abstraction waiting
for an owner to appear to give it character and fulfillment. To divest man of
this relationship and prevent him from forming it runs counter to a metaphysical
chemistry between man and property. If it were justified, then so would every
assault upon man which would achieve it.

Universalized theft, or nationalized theft, as it has been experienced thus far,
requires universalized force. This accounts for the massive state that emerged
with Soviet Communism. There is, however, yet another reason for this swollen
condition. It, too, has its roots in the nature of property. Property requires
attention if it is to be productive. Divesting individuals of private property
does not remove this requirement; instead, it aggravates it. By and large, the
property that had been owned by individuals was taken over by the government in
the Soviet Union. The management, or attempted management, of this property
required a large number of bureaucrats. The combination of universalized force
and bureaucratic management of property produced the massive state.

## The Importance of Believing

The delusions that accompany communist ideology are manifold. They are delusions
such as are necessary to believe it and try to put it into practice. They are
the delusions of the criminal mind writ large. Theft is a crime. So are all the
acts done in support of theft. Marx conceived the most monstrous crime
imaginable. Lenin and his followers carried out this crime within the Russian
Empire and fostered its spread to the rest of the world. But it was necessary
that they not think of it as a crime and desirable that people in general not
think of it that way. To that end, the law which makes theft a crime must be
held to be invalid; the moral code which supports the idea must be denied; the
cultural inheritance which bolsters property and private rights must be negated;
and the age old conceptions of human nature must be put at naught. All that is
left in support of communism is human will, the will to believe, and the force
that resides in its monopoly by government. The more closely the prescriptions
of communist ideology are fulfilled, the more nearly impotent the populace. The
more massive the state the more helpless the populace.

Therein lies the dilemma of communism and, indeed, of all socialism. Communism
could only succeed by engaging the efforts, the wills, the energies, and the
initiative of the population behind it. But these are held in thrall by the
massive state, by the ubiquitous police, by the swollen bureaucracy, and by the
requirement of ideological conformity. The populace could only become effective
by the reduction of the state and the restoration of freedom. Every step in that
direction is a retreat from communism. The dilemma cannot be resolved; it is
inherent in communism. The dilemma arose from the delusions of communism.

## Reforming Human Nature

One of the primary delusions of communism is that human nature can be
transformed so as to remove the pursuit of self-interest from human behavior. It
should not be necessary to turn to experience and history to learn this. The
contemplation of man and the condition in which he finds himself should be
sufficient for discovering the essentiality of his pursuit of self-interest.

Human consciousness is such that only the individual concerned is aware of his
needs and wants and what priorities they have. Life on this earth is of a
character that requires that in many instances he must look after himself. He
must look before he crosses the street lest he be run over. He must take care
what he puts in his mouth lest he ingest some harmful substance. Even roses have
thorns, and he who would pick them must be careful that he not be stuck by them.

The amounts of goods and services available are limited, but our desires for
them are not. Hence, we contend or compete for them, and each does well to
protect his own interest in the trades that take place. Indeed, it is difficult
to grasp how any trade, sale, or purchase could be made if the individuals were
not acting in their interest. A disinterested purchase would be one made without
regard to what was wanted, the quantity and quality of the goods, or what
priorities might exist about acquiring them.

## Root Out Self-Interest

A second delusion of communism is that removing the cultural supports to the
individual would result in rooting out self-interest. On the contrary, the same
culture which supports the individual acts to direct, limit, restrain, and
civilize his pursuit of self-interest. Civilized people recognize and observe
limits on their pursuit of self-interest. Good manners require that the
individual take his place in line, that he defer to others in many cases, and
that he respect the equal rights of others. A civilized culture even as it
protects the individual in his pursuits inculcates the belief that there are
occasions when the individual should deny himself in order to aid and care for
others.

The family as a unit is especially dependent upon parental restraint in
asserting their interests in order to provide for the children and those unable
to take care of themselves. It is the duty of the parents as well to inhibit
their children when they rambunctiously pursue their interests, in the interest
of family harmony and peace in the community. Community, too, depends upon
apparently selfless acts by its members in defense against aggressors and to
rescue those who are endangered.

But none of this need be in derogation of the individual's pursuit of his own
self-interest. One of the great missions of culture and civilization is to
provide a peaceful and harmonious framework within which the individual can seek
his own constructively. To destroy the culture because it supports the
individual will not alter the individual's determination to pursue his
self-interest; it will only remove the restraints upon it. The reason for this
should be clear. Our pursuit of self-interest is not culturally induced; it
arises from our nature and the nature of conditions within which we find
ourselves. Communism delusively pits itself against culture when its true enemy
is human nature.

## Reliance on Force

A third delusion is that force, or government, can be used effectively to
transform human nature and produce a peaceful and productive society. So far as
we know, human nature cannot be changed, but human behavior can be, at least to
some extent. But force is only a minor adjunct in successful efforts to change
human behavior. It can be used to punish and inhibit wrongdoing, but it is the
weakest of all means for producing rightdoing. Rightdoing proceeds from and
engages the best efforts of the wills of individuals. Force can no doubt produce
a modicum of obedience, but it will usually be minimal and will tend to be
limited even further by its failure to engage the constructive ingenuity of the
ones complying.

From these basic delusions follow the mass of delusions by which the Soviet
Union has been misruled for over sixty years now.

It should not be necessary, as I say, to resort to historical evidence to
validate the above observations. But if it is, the record of the Soviet Union
provides a cornucopia of supporting evidence.

## Breakdowns in Production

An early visitor to the Soviet Union proclaimed, in a burst of enthusiasm: "I
have seen the future, and it works." Those who have examined the situation over
a longer period of time and more thoroughly would be more likely to say: "I have
seen the future of Communism, and not even the plumbing works."

That is, however, but a poor joke and a half-truth. Surely, there are water
closets in the Soviet Union that work, at least some of the time.

More important, if we should follow this lead it would take us away from, not
toward, the greatest failures of Soviet Communism. It would take us into the
realm of that pseudo-science, macro-economics, where the greatest truth we would
be able to discover is that statistics can be used to deceive. There is no
comparison between goods produced by decree and those produced to supply wants
registered in the market. Goods produced by decree are qualitatively inferior;
they are orphans in the market place, seeking some kindhearted soul who will
adopt them. Macro-economics can only deal with them by declaring them the equal
of all other similar goods, for only thus can they be reduced to statistics.
Since they are not, the result can only be a deception.

## Colossal Failures

Even so, it needs to be affirmed that Soviet Communism has had signal economic
failures. The Soviet Union inherited one of the most productive grain-producing
areas in the world and succeeded so well by collectivizing and introducing state
farms that even by opening millions of acres of new land it became a
grain-deficit land. Central planning of industrial activity is a recognized
failure today, even by many Soviet economists. In fact, a multivolumned
encyclopedia on how not to produce goods could be compiled from the Soviet
experience. A "successful" plant manager is one who can get a low quota of
production, have a very large stockpile of parts he will need, and manage to
produce a sufficient quantity of shoddy goods to exceed his quota.

One of the reasons for the failure of centralized planning coupled with an
atmosphere of fear comes out in the story below. It was told by a man who had
been a Soviet inspector.

> As inspector I once arrived at a plant which was supposed to have delivered
> mining machines, but did not do it. When I entered the plant premises, I saw
> that the machines were piled up all over the place, but they were all
> unfinished. I asked what was going on. The director gave evasive answers.
> Finally, when the big crowd surrounding us had disappeared, he called me to
> his office.

There, the story came out. It seems that the specifications called for the
machines to be painted with red oil-resistant varnish. But the only red varnish
that he had was not oil-resistant. He had green oil-resistant varnish, but was
afraid that if he used this in violation of instructions he would get eight
years in prison. The inspector knew the machines were badly needed, was certain
that whether they were painted red or green could make little difference, but he
too feared a prison sentence should he authorize the change. He did cable the
ministry hoping for a quick decision in favor of using the green varnish.

> But it took unusually long. Apparently they did not want to take any chances
> at the ministry either, and they wanted to cover themselves. Finally I
> received permission. I put this cablegram from the ministry in my pocket and
> kept it for the rest of my life, and signed the note allowing the use of the
> green paint....[^8_2]

The infelicities of Soviet production may be best summed up by this Russian joke
related by John Gunther:

> One Russian tells another that the Soviet authorities have perfected an
> intricate atomic bomb that will fit into a suitcase, and that this will one
> day be delivered to a target like New York. The second Russian replies,
> "Impossible.  Where would anybody get a suitcase?"[^8_3]

## Serving the Rulers

But the greatest failures of Soviet Communism have not been economic. Indeed,
such successes as it has had, aside from the exportation of ideology, have been
quantitative and economic. Large universities have been conceived and built, a
modicum of education made universally available to the young, numerous
physicians trained, whole new cities brought into being, hydroelectric dams
built, and so on.

Political power has been brought to bear so as to produce what was most wanted
by those who ruled. The priorities of the political authorities have sooner or
later been met, though it would be an error to conceive of this having been done
economically. It has been done at horrendously excessive cost in lives,
suffering, deprivation, and wasted natural resources. Indeed, in the absence of
a free market, the Soviet rulers have no way of determining what it should cost
to produce goods. Still, they have produced huge quantities of generally
inferior goods.

## Social and Spiritual

The greatest failures of Soviet Communism are social and spiritual. Many of
these failures should be the occasion for rejoicing around the world. None can
rejoice, of course, about the persecution, the terror, the suffering, and the
hardships of the peoples of the Russian Empire. They have endured for many years
now an occupation, as it were, by an alien force. That alien force has been
animated by Communist ideology and includes all who have attempted to impose
their will on the Russian people in its name.

That alien force launched the most massive assault upon the human spirit, upon
individuality, upon religion, upon society, and upon the family that the world
has ever known. This assault has been carried out by the assembled power of a
totalitarian state, carried out by all the devices conceivable to a criminal
mind: brutal murder, torture, propaganda, threats, exile, mass starvation, and
incomparable terror. A gigantic effort has been made to wipe out the heritage of
a people, to destroy the ancient bonds of community, and to break peoples under
the wheel of the state. All who have any fellow feeling for others should view
this action with sorrow and compassion for the peoples who thus suffer.

## The Human Spirit Survives

Nonetheless, there is occasion for rejoicing. Word comes to us from the Russian
people that the human spirit has not been crushed. It is wondrously alive in the
vibrant eyes and stern personality of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and, no doubt, in
millions of others.

This is not to say that the unleashing of such might for such purposes against a
people has not produced gaping wounds and ugly scars, so to speak. Surely it
has. Many of the bonds of community have indeed been broken. The family has been
sorely tried by informing, by the ease of divorce, by the necessity for women to
do heavy work. Institutional religion has been made largely subservient to the
state, where it has been permitted to survive. Society has lost control over all
institutions by which it may function. Propaganda has taken a heavy toll upon
mental development and understanding. Fear has driven frank conversation into
nooks and crannies.

But human nature has survived and endured. The Soviet regime has not made a dent
in the determination of the Russian people to pursue their self-interest.
Farmers pursue their self-interest vigorously by avidly cultivating the little
plots of land from which the government allows them to keep the produce. People
are ever on the alert to hear of some scarce item available in the stores, and
scurry out to purchase it when the word reaches them. The pursuit of
self-interest by Party members is almost palpable, but they are distinguished
from the general populace only in the corrupt methods available to them.

The Russian people have no intention of committing suicide, which is what the
abandonment of self-interest entails. They may be hampered by the rules and
regulations in their pursuit of it, but they seek it as certainly as an
alcoholic sought booze in America during Prohibition. Those who value life,
then, may rejoice that Russians are still pursuing their self-interest.

## Society Suffers

The wound is nowhere deeper and the scars nowhere uglier than upon what for a
better word we call society in the Soviet Union. In the vulgar language of
today, all activity, life and relationships are divided into a public and a
private sector. Where people are moderately free, there are actually several
realms: the realm of government, the realm of society, and the realm of the
individual that is personal and private. These are not exclusive spheres; they
are rather complementary, interdependent, and interacting realms.

Society encompasses that realm of social relationships that are largely
voluntary, the realm of manners, customs, traditions, morality, voluntary
institutions, and ways by which individuals live fruitfully and peacefully with
one another. The cultural heritage is activated and carried on largely by
society. It is the arena of influence and persuasion rather than of force.

It may be correct to refer to a "public" and "private" sector in the Soviet
Union, though the public sector has been elephantized and the private sector
dwarfed. But society has been virtually destroyed. Society depends upon
widespread trust, confidence, and general good will, as well as a considerable
measure of freedom. These have been all but wiped out in the Soviet Union. Trust
and good will can hardly survive the informing of children on parents, of
neighbor upon neighbor, of husband upon wife: all of which has been fostered and
encouraged, even required, by the Soviet system. They can hardly survive,
either, the constant surveillance, the hidden microphones, the keeping of
extensive dossiers by the police, the listening in on telephone conversations,
and the opening of mail: all common practice.

Society needs institutions which it largely controls: churches, clubs,
libraries, markets, hospitals, and various sorts of voluntary associations.
Where any of these have been permitted in the Soviet Union, they are under the
thumb of the Party which, in turn, is an instrument of the state. The lines of
communication on which society depends are clogged by a massive state.

Two developments have taken place in the absence of society. One is a crudeness
of relationships in general. Clerks are usually rude and harsh of manner.
Hedrick Smith notes that there is a Russian manner that comes across in "public
as coarse indifference, passive fatalism, and pushy discourtesy. Western
visitors have commented on the glum, shuttered faces of Russian street crowds,
and the brusque, negative surliness of service people. In our early months, I
remember nodding at Russians, or saying hello if their eyes met mine at close
range in public but all I ever got in return was an impassive stare."[^8_4]

This coarseness of social relations evinces itself in yet another way, in
busybodiness, which has no doubt been promoted by Communism. Leona Schechter,
who spent several years in Moscow, gives several examples of it. Here is one.
She had taken one of her children to school but had neglected to dress very
warmly against the cold:

> ...Just as we were about to go in the school door, a red-haired Russian lady
> ...stopped to harangue me about the way I was dressed. I told her I didn't
> want to get Barney into the building late so she let me go, but she was
> waiting when I came out. She yelled at me that I was stupid to come out
> without boots. She warned that I would get very sick if I didn't dress
> properly. I stood listening to her lecture, freezing, wanting nothing so much
> as to run home and warm my feet. She believed she was doing her socialist
> duty.[^8_5]

Socialist duty it might be, but sociable it was not.

## Rebuilding Society through Private Circles

The other development is the rudimentary rebuilding of society in tightly knit
private circles. Friends gather in the kitchens—about the only possible meeting
place—of private homes, reasonably safe from informers, from hidden microphones,
and from the ubiquitous police. There, spontaneous and free communication can
take place. The Russians are then quite different, according to Smith: "But in
private, within a trusted circle, usually the family and close friends but often
embracing new acquaintances very quickly if some personal chord of empathy is
touched, they are among the warmest, most cheerful, generous, emotional and
overwhelmingly hospitable people on earth."[^8_6]

There is some evidence that following the relaxation of the rigidity of Soviet
regime in the 1960's these circles have expanded. Manuscripts of works that the
regime will not permit to be published circulate in what is called *samzidat*
editions (privately copied). Groups of people gather to view paintings that
cannot get a showing in governmentally controlled museums. Concerts are even
performed in what must be thought of as private. The account that Zhores and Roy
Medvedev give of friends and colleagues who came to the aid of Zhores when he
was locked up in a mental institution indicates that for some, at least, a
considerable society is forming. The Communists have not succeeded, then, in
destroying the old society and building a new one. Society has just gone
underground, awaiting the opportunity, the freedom, to emerge once again in full
flower.

Perhaps the most dramatic failure of the Soviet Communists, however, has been
their inability to wipe out religion. Decades of atheistic propaganda, the
widespread closing of churches, the denial of general access to means for study,
worship, and religious training have failed to accomplish the sought-after
result. Of course, the assault on religion has done great damage. Leona
Schechter gives this foreboding account from one who had experienced it:

> But Pyotr with his sad, sensitive blue eyes and Christlike beard decried even
> the Revolution. For the first time we heard him speak from the depths of his
> spirit. He appealed for the return of the Christian values of the Russian
> Orthodox Church. "We were better off when we could appeal to human values, the
> values of the church. Our lives were richer and we had the excitement and
> mystery of holy days. We had a sense of man. Now all we have are empty slogans
> and corruption. The Revolution destroyed Christianity in Russia and it also
> destroyed the Russian spirit."[^8_7]

It did not, of course, destroy Christianity or the Russian spirit. It did
largely destroy the social and communal aspect of Christianity in Russia,
driving it underground, and depriving public life of its redeeming values.

But religion is alive in Russia. An American correspondent was asked by a
Russian acquaintance if he believed in God. He indicated that he did not. "Just
wait," the Russian replied, "You have not lived in Russia long enough yet." That
is hyperbole, to be sure, for not all Russians believe in God, but the point is
well taken nonetheless. There is by most accounts the indication of a religious
resurgence in Russia. The authorities long held that religion was dying out,
that it was just a relic, and that only old women went to church. But an
interesting phenomenon can now be reported: as one generation of old women dies
out, another takes their place.

## Covert Christianity

Those who attend church are mainly the ones who have no hope of gaining position
or advantage from the Soviet powers, but even those who do have such hopes can
practice their religion privately, and some do. Millions openly profess
Christianity; an untold number of others await the day when they may do so.

The Schechters visited a museum in a remote province of the Soviet Union. It was
next to the site of an ancient Christian church, destroyed by the Arabs in the
tenth century. "Until recently no one knew what the original church looked like,
but a traveler found a bas relief of it in Paris. Since then new buildings in
the center of Yerevan have followed the lines of the church's architecture. Bits
of colored mosaic and broken stone pieces left after the Arabs ... are sorted
and waiting for the time when the church can be rebuilt."[^8_8]

That is surely a parable of religion in Russia; it exists in carefully preserved
bits and pieces awaiting the time when the church can be rebuilt.

## A Communist Paradox

Soviet Communism has failed; it has failed to provide people with goods and
services economically and competitively; it has failed to root out
self-interest; it has failed significantly to alter human nature; it has failed
to build a new society; it has failed to crush religion. It has succeeded in
erecting a massive state which has imposed an oppressive system on the Russian
peoples. Undergirding this system is Communist ideology.

Herein lies a paradox. The Soviet system is underpinned by an ideology which
none living under it may believe. True, the propaganda machine grinds out the
same old phrases. Party members attend the interminable sessions on the ideology
and the Party line. Those called upon to do so will mouth the correct words and
sentences. But there is much speculation that no one believes what he is saying.
Hedrick Smith reports this conversation:

> "You have to go to these political meetings but nobody listens," said a plump
> Leningrad schoolteacher in her late thirties…. "When the director of our
> school gives the lecture, he tries to make it interesting. He's a nice man—a
> Party member but a nice man. But everyone is bored and nobody believes it."
>
> "What about the person giving the lecture?" Ann asked her.
>
> "Even he doesn't believe what he's saying. The older generation really
> believed in Lenin and they felt this was the way to build a new society. But
> my generation doesn't believe it at all. We know it's false."[^8_9]

Some even doubt that the members of the politburo any longer believe in the
ideology.[^8_10]

## What Sustains the Power?

Supposing this to be substantially true, what keeps Soviet Communism in power,
then? Many things, no doubt, some obvious, some not so obvious. Soviet Communism
has inertia going for it. Its leaders hold the power over a massive state that
is well established. The populace is impotent, lacking either the means to
contend with it or effective communication with those who may oppose it. Though
the terror has abated in recent years, the Soviet state is still a fearful
thing, and many still remember the harsh and prolonged terror of the Stalin
years.

The Soviet Union has recognition from the ruling powers of the world. Two things
more, at the least, sustain it. One is the idea that has the world in its grip.
The Soviet Union represents the premier effort to concert all efforts behind the
achievement of felicity on this earth. Those who are advancing what they believe
to be a triumphant idea cannot, by and large, ever have it known or accepted
that the idea has failed in Russia. The fall of Communism in Russia would have a
devastating impact on the idea; it must not be permitted to happen.

The other thing that keeps Soviet Communism going is fear of the alternative.
Communism has ever depended upon a hatred of those whom it denominates as its
enemies. All its propaganda does not succeed in making Communism loved, but it
has much greater success in making enemies hated. "Capitalism" is, of course,
the putative enemy of Communism, but it invented an enemy which was the
personification of all evil. The generic name of that enemy is "fascism."
Fascism did, perhaps does, exist, of course, but not fascism as the Communist
Party line would have it conceived, not the fascism which was the diametric
opposite of communism. On the contrary, fascism was a species of socialism,
revolutionary socialism even, bearing the closest resemblance of all to
Marxism-Leninism.

For the examination of this supposed enemy of communism, we turn now for a look
at Nazi Germany.

Next: 9. *Germany: Ideology Contends for Power.*

[^8_1]: Zhores A. Medvedev and Roy A. Medvedev, *A Question of Madness* (New
  York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971), pp. 183-84.

[^8_2]: David Granick, "Plant Managers and Their Overseers,- in Joseph L. Nogee,
  *Man, State, and Society in the Soviet Union* (New York: Praeger, 1972), p.
  198.

[^8_3]: John Gunther, *Inside Russia Today* (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1962,
  rev. ed.), p. 76.

[^8_4]: Hedrick Smith, *The Russians* (New York: Quadrangle, 1976), p. 104.

[^8_5]: Leona and Jerrold Schechter, *et al., An American Family in Moscow*
  (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1975), p. 104.

[^8_6]: Smith, op. *cit.,* p. 104.

[^8_7]: Schechter and Schechter, *op. cit.,* pp. 235-36.

[^8_8]: Ibid., p. 372.

[^8_9]: Smith, op. cit., p. 288.

[^8_10]: Ibid., p. 292.

