# World in the Grip of an Idea: 9. Germany - Ideology Contends for Power,
  1918-1930

[Thursday, September 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/september-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

"By their fruits ye shall know them," Scripture says. By contrast, ideologists
contend that by their *intentions* you must distinguish among them. It is
crucial to understand this mode of thinking as it is practiced, particularly by
socialist ideologues. The idea that has the world in its grip gains adherents,
spreads, and tightens its hold because of the alleged good intentions of its
believers. The results of the idea are everywhere destructive, the degree of the
destruction depending mainly on the extent of the application. But this is
obscured so far as possible behind a smokescreen of good intentions.

If the methods of operation of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany and of Joseph Stalin
(or Nikolai Lenin or Malenkov) are compared, as they will be at a later point,
it can be shown that their differences were insignificant alongside their
similarities. They are differences such as there may be between the Communist
penchant for the shot in the back of the neck or death by exposure in the frozen
north and the Nazi preference for execution by poison gas. Yet Nazis and
Communists are generally held to be quite different species, the Nazi behavior
having been beyond the pale while we must learn to live with Communists. Their
differences are supposed to be somehow decisive.

## How Different?

What are these differences? Let us go to what is supposed to be the nub of the
matter at once. The Nazis, it is said, were racists, anti-Semitic, and sought to
destroy the Jewish people. Grant the point, for the weight of the evidence is
overwhelming that this was the case. But what of the Communists of the Soviet
Union? Have they not persecuted and attempted to destroy the Jews in their own
way? The point here is not so readily granted, for it is generally believed that
some distinctions are in order, and perhaps they are. At any rate, let us make
some.

In the first place, Jews have not been the only ones, or even the main ones,
persecuted in the Soviet Union. A case could be made that Communists do not
discriminate on the basis of race or nationality those whom they persecute,
though examples could be given that would cast doubt on this proposition. But,
for the sake of argument, let the statement stand, since members of every race,
nationality, religion, or ethnic complexion have been persecuted by the
Communists. More, some Jews have been able to survive within the Soviet Union.
Some, who are technically called Jews, have even prospered, been members of the
Party, and even sat in the counsels of the government.

But at what price? In answering this we come closer to the crux of the matter.
They had better not be Zionists. If they are to prosper, they must not practice
the Hebrew religion, even if they have an opportunity to do so. More, their
chances of succeeding would be greatly advanced if they could somehow divest
themselves of every aspect of their culture which might distinguish them as
Jews. In short, a Jew is likely to succeed in the Soviet Union to the extent
that he is not a Jew.

It can be argued, of course, that Soviet persecution of Jews is not racial in
origin. It is, instead, cultural. The Communists only wish to wipe out Jewish
culture, or what might be called "Jewishness," not Jews. That is a most
interesting distinction, one which would probably have appealed to the Medieval
scholar, Duns Scotus (from whom we derive the word "dunce"), for he had an
especial liking for subtle distinctions.

The difficulty lies in the fact that there is no such *thing* as "Jewishness."
Hence, government cannot act on it. It cannot be arrested, locked up,
interrogated, tortured, shot, or put in slave labor camps. That can only be done
to real beings, and Communists have specialized in doing it to people, even
Jews. Whether it would have comforted Zinoviev, Kamanev, Trotsky, and Bukharin
(Communist leaders of Jewish derivation put to death on orders from Stalin) or
thousands of other Jews to learn that they were not put to death because they
were Jews but because of their "Jewishness" we have no way of knowing.

Communists do not admit that they persecute Jews for their "Jewishness," but
there is no doubt of the assault on the Hebrew religion, on Zionism, or on
aspects of Jewish culture, and there is good reason to believe that Jews have
suffered disproportionately for their heterodoxy in a land that requires
orthodoxy. There comes a point when intentions matter not in the least;
Zinoviev, Kamanev, Trotsky, and Bukharin are just as dead as they would have
been had they died in a Nazi gas chamber. They died because they did not conform
to some pattern in the mind of Stalin.

## Rooted in Socialism

Communism and Nazism have common roots. The focus on Hitler's racism and the
playing down of Soviet anti-"Jewishness" has helped to obscure this fact. These
common roots are not only obscured but denied by the claim that Communism
belongs to the "left wing" and Nazism to the "right wing." According to this
terminology, they belong to opposite ends of the political spectrum. Writer
after writer in book after book employs these terms in this way as if they
applied to some obvious actual state of affairs. What they are doing, however,
is propagating an illusion, an illusion which in its day may have satisfied the
Nazis well enough and still satisfies the Communists.

That Nazis and Communists were usually political opponents is true, but there is
no reason to conclude from that fact that they belonged on opposite ends of the
political spectrum. The rivalry between brothers in a family is often intense;
it is not even something new, for Cain slew Abel. And Communism and Nazism were
brothers, or something of the sort, under the skin.

The full name of the Nazi Party was National *Socialist* German Workers' Party.
But was Hitler a socialist? Clearly, opinions differ as to the correct answer to
this question. According to the Communist Party line, he was not a socialist.
The weight of opinion of avowed socialists, and their fellow travelers, around
the world has been that he was not. Indeed, the gravamen of the claim that he
belongs to the "right wing" is that he was not a socialist.  Their desire to
blame Hitler on something other than socialism is understandable (he's yours,
not ours, they are saying), but that is hardly reason to accept their position.

## Narrowly Nationalistic

Hitler claimed to be a *national* socialist, in contrast to *international*
socialists. ("International," in Nazi ideology, would refer both to Communism
and to any socialism with which Jews might be associated.) But if we look at the
realities instead of the claims, this distinction tends to break down too.
Hitler's Germany was hardly more nationalistic than Stalin's Russia, with its
virtually uncrossable borders and chauvinistic appeals to the people. Indeed,
every socialist regime is nationalistic in cutting its people off from trade and
limiting intercourse with nonsocialist countries. Hitler's claim to being a
socialist should be accepted, but since it is not generally, the demonstration
of it will have to occupy a part of our attention.

The most direct way to determine in what corner of the political spectrum Nazism
belongs may be to change the terminology. Instead of asking whether or not
Hitler was a socialist, it will be much more fruitful to ask whether or not he
was a *collectivist.* The answer to this can be made without equivocation:
Hitler was a collectivist. The Nazi Party was collectivist. The purpose of so
many of the practices, forms, and activities of the Nazis was collectivist—the
mass meetings, the raised hand salute in unison, the cries of "Sieg Heil," the
multitude of Swastika-adorned flags, the jackbooted soldiers on parade with
their exaggerated precision drills, and the highly emotional speeches of the
leaders. These and other such activities were aimed at arousing a single emotion
which all would share, the forging of a unity, a collective, through shared
common experience. So, too, was the appeal to German nationality, to blood and
soil, to the master race, to a common destiny. War was glorified by the Nazis
precisely because more than any other activity it calls forth and sustains the
unified effort which is the aim of collectivism. War is collectivism in action;
the spirit of collectivism becomes flesh in battle.

## Collectivistic

Nazism was collectivist. Socialism is collectivist. All of them are on the same
side of the political spectrum. They belong to the "left wing," if such terms
must be employed, though the present writer would be happy to see those phrases
lumped together with a host of other journalistic argot which now corrupts the
language, and consigned to the waste bin.

The kinship of these ideologies becomes apparent, too, when we recall the basic
idea that has the world in its grip. The idea is: To achieve human felicity by
concerting all efforts toward its realization, to root out and destroy the
cultural supports to individualism and the pursuit of self-interest, and to use
government to concert all efforts on behalf of a general felicity and destroy
the cultural obstacles to it. All socialist ideologies, indeed all modern
ideologies, if there are any that are not in some sense socialist, proceed by
discovering some ill or ills that afflict society (the Apple in the Garden of
Eden, so to speak) and set forth the means by which the ills are to be
corrected. As the present writer noted some years ago:

> The ideologue tends to fanaticism. Whatever it is that will set things right…
> becomes for him a fixed idea. This fixed idea may be democracy, equality, the
> triumph of the proletariat, the coming of the kingdom, the single tax, or
> whatever his panacea happens to be. Come the proletarian revolution, one will
> say, and the good society will be ushered in. Employ creatively his abstraction,
> the "state," another will hold, and a great and productive social unity will
> emerge. Extend democratic participation into every area of life, and life will
> be glorious. Abolish property, abolish government, single tax the land,
> redistribute the wealth, maintain racial solidarity, organize interest groups,
> form a world government, develop an all-embracing commitment to the nation, use
> government to make men free, and so on through the… enthusiasms which have
> animated those under the sway of some ideology or other.[^9_1]

The content varies, but these ideologies come out of a similar mold of analysis
and mode of operation.

## A Disruptive Element

The main ill besetting German society, Hitler claimed, was the Jews and their
various intellectual offspring: cultural diversity, democracy, communism,
artistic disintegration, finance capitalism, and so on. The Jews were a
disruptive element preventing an organic unity of the German people. They were
aliens within the society acting as a huge obstacle to its productive fruition.
Root out, remove, and destroy this disruptive element and the Germanic or Aryan
race could concert its efforts toward great ends. The Jews were to Nazism what
the bourgeoisie (or capitalists) were to Marxism. The Jewish exploitation of
Germans was to Nazism what capitalist exploitation of labor was to communism.
The German race was to Nazis what the proletariat was to Communists. The
parallels are even closer than this may suggest.

Hitler's most basic appeal was to German workers to rise up and throw off the
exploitation of the Jews, though he did not always approach it in this way. The
Nazis aimed, too, to root out and destroy every cultural artifact which was
thought to be a product of Jewishness. A revolution was to be wrought in German
life. Communism was one of the putative enemies, but a good case can be made
that Nazism was an aberrant subspecies of communism. Its positions were
paradigmatic; its methods were essentially the same.

Nazism was dipped from the simmering cauldron of ideologies contending for power
in Germany in the 1920's. It may be, as some contend, that what is here being
referred to as the idea which has the world in its grip was born amidst the
French Revolution in France, but the shaping of these ideologies was much more
the work of Germans. In any case, Germans were mightily bent toward collectivism
in the 1920's. Why this was so, and why Nazism emerged triumphant can be
partially explained by German history.

## Nationalism, Revolution and Social Reform

The three main ingredients of the German ideologies were nationalism,
revolution, and social reform. It may well be that nationalism was the most
important of these. Certainly, it has occupied the center stage for much of the
time in the last hundred years or so of German history. In fact, strictly
speaking, there is no German history prior to 1871. German was only a language,
a language in search, it may be, of a state to encompass the area in which it
was spoken. True, Germany had been united to some extent for a time in the
Middle Ages as part of a larger empire. But it was not called Germany, and its
boundaries were in no way restricted to what we now think of as Germany. At any
rate, this empire broke up long before the modern era began. One writer
describes the situation this way: "By the thirteenth century there were
ninety-three ecclesiastical and fourteen lay princes. A century later there were
forty-four lay princes, and their number continued to multiply as partitions
took place between heirs. Many parts of the country were converted into tiny
fragments."[^9_2] The relics of empire were strengthened somewhat by strong
Spanish monarchs in the sixteenth century, but their hold was severed by the
Protestant Reformation and its aftermath.

German unification was finally accomplished in 1871 with the proclamation of a
German Empire at the conclusion of the Franco-Prussian War. The architect of
this unification was Otto von Bismarck. The king of Prussia was proclaimed as
emperor (Kaiser) of Germany as well as retaining his old position as the head of
the leading German state. Princes and kings in other provinces retained their
hereditary thrones, and provincial legislatures continued to share in governing
the provinces.

The German Empire ruled over by Kaisers Wilhelm I (1871-1888) and II (1888-1918)
was a federated empire. The symbol of its unity was the Kaiser himself, who also
held the reins of power. Chancellors were not creatures of the legislature but
of the Kaiser, though Bismarck gave distinction to the post. Although there was
a German parliament composed of a Bundesrat, in which the states or provinces
were represented, and a Reichstag, in which the populace was represented, the
main instrument of unity was the Prussianized armed forces. Although Austria,
another German-speaking country, was not a part of the German Empire, German
unification had been virtually achieved.

## Shattering the Unity

In the closing days of World War I, this unity was shattered. The symbol of
unity, Kaiser Wilhelm II, fled to Holland and abdicated, prompted by his prime
minister and undeterred by the High Command.  In short order, all the other
German princes and kings abdicated as their power dissolved before them. The
armed forces disintegrated both in consequence of the imminent military
surrender and the thrust of soldiers and sailors organized into soviets or
councils.

The stage appeared to be set for a repetition of the events that had taken place
in Russia the year before. The parallels with the February Revolution were very
close. In Russia in February of 1917 and in Germany in November of 1918, the
emperors abdicated, the armed forces refused to obey their commanders, and
workers and soldiers organized into soviets or councils. Red flags were waving
in the streets, and there were those ready to rush on immediately to a Bolshevik
revolution in Germany. More, Friedrich Ebert, the leader of the Social
Democratic Party, formed a provisional government and began preparations for
having a constituent assembly.

But there were important differences between the German situation and the
Russian one, too. For one thing, the war was over in Europe, and the German
provisional government did not have to wrestle with conducting a war. For
another, the soldiers do not appear to have been as radicalized as they were in
Russia. Even more crucial, the main Marxist party in Germany, the Social
Democratic Party, had been largely won over to evolutionary or gradualist
socialism. Its leadership could, and did, claim to be the party of the workers,
thus defusing some of the revolutionary ardor, and Ebert used what armed forces
he could assemble to suppress the incipient revolution.

The Communist Party was small—that was true in Russia too—, and it was not under
the discipline of leaders like Lenin and Trotsky. More, two of the communist
leaders, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, were put to death in the course of
suppression of the revolution. Kurt Eisner, a socialist who had formed a
republic in Bavaria, was shot down on the streets of Munich. Those determined to
avert revolution used more muscle than those seeking to make one.

It is not too much to say, though, that Germany was waiting for the other shoe
to drop, so to speak, in the 1920's. The first shoe had dropped, the first stage
of revolution had occurred, in November of 1918. That is not to say that a
revolution must go full cycle once it has begun. But once a government has been
overturned an effective one, one which has authority over and has the respect or
awe of the populace, must take its place sooner or later. Germany in the 1920's
hung between continued disintegration and establishing an effective government.
The bureaucracy, the police, the army, and local governments maintained
authority when and where they would and could, but their attachment and loyalty
to the government of the Weimar Republic was tentative and uncertain. The
centripetal forces often gained on the centrifugal, opening the way again and
again to revolution.

## The Treaty of Versailles

Germany was bent toward collectivism and collectivist nationalism by the Treaty
of Versailles which was imposed on her after World War I. German leaders asked
for and were granted an armistice. An armistice is what would most likely be
called a cease-fire today, i.e., a stopping of hostilities in order to consider
the terms of peace. It is not a surrender, and certainly not an unconditional
surrender. Even so, the terms of the peace were not negotiated but imposed by
the Allies on Germany.

Large areas mainly inhabited by Germans were separated from Germany or
demilitarized or, in the case of the Ruhr, occupied by foreign troops for a
time. Germany was supposed to have only a tiny army and only small ships in its
navy. Most devastating of all, the German people were held to be collectively
guilty for the war. Reparations were to be paid in huge amounts by the German
government to the Allies. It did not matter that the German government of the
Weimar Republic was not the government which had started and prosecuted the war.
The German people were guilty, collectively guilty, the settlement proclaimed.
Collective guilt, one suspects, can only be purged or renounced collectively.

The tendency of the Treaty of Versailles was to denationalize Germany, to make
it a military nonentity, to make being German a shameful condition, and to
penalize the status by reparation payments for several generations. Whether the
treaty was just or not, it failed to produce the desired psychological effect on
many Germans. Instead, it provoked the most virulent nationalist sentiments.
Far from being ashamed that they were Germans, many found new virtue and pride
in it, that special virtue attaching to those who are convinced they have been
deeply wronged.

## Negotiating for Concessions

One of the most difficult tasks of the governments of the Weimar Republic was to
send their foreign ministers, hat in hand, to seek concessions from the Allies.
People who believe they have been wronged do not wish to go hat in hand for
concessions; they are defiant, and wish to demand and force the righting of the
wrong. To the more radical of the nationalists, anyone negotiating for
concessions was a traitor. Hitler was able to use the fact that Jews, notably
Walter Rathenau and Gustav Streseman, undertook the difficult task of
negotiation to bolster his charge that the Jews were selling out the German
people.

But Germany was in much greater danger of falling apart in the 1920's than it
was of unified or collective action. Indeed, a good case could be made that
Germany had fallen apart at the end of World War I, and that it was never drawn
together in the 1920's. The method of election to the Reichstag prescribed by
the Weimar Constitution, adopted in 1919, came close to guaranteeing this state
of affairs.

The Constitution called for proportional representation of parties in the
Reichstag according to the share of the vote which each party received in
general elections. Many members of the legislature received their appointments
from party lists. This assured party control over the members, gave impetus to
having a multiplicity of parties, and fragmented German politics into
ideological configurations. The dominance of party made it difficult for any
leaders with popular following to emerge. The Reichstag hardly spoke or acted
for Germany; it spoke and acted for the parties and their individual ideological
versions of what should be done.

The parties fell into three configurations generally. There were the socialist
parties: the Social Democratic Party, the Independent Social Democratic Party,
and the Communist Party. Then there were the center parties: the Democratic
Party, the Catholic Centre Party, and, sometimes, the People's Party. The other
grouping, usually described as "right wing," would have been made up of the
Bavarian People's Party (though it might sometimes be centrist), the Nationalist
Party, and the Nazis, among others.

## Minority Positions

From a parliamentary and, I believe, ideological point of view these
classifications are drastically wrong in the case of at least two of the
parties. Neither the Communist nor the Nazi Party participated in any of the
governments of the 1920's; they were purely opposition parties.  Moreover, they
usually opposed the same things. True, their spokesmen may have used their most
vicious invective on one another, but if they are to be placed in any
parliamentary bloc in the 1920's it is with one another. As to the ideological
affinities of the Nazis, that is a point requiring further attention.

None of the parties ever gained a majority of the popular vote or had a majority
of members in the Reichstag. This meant that every government organized had to
be a coalition government, a coalition usually of at least three parties. The
Social Democratic Party was the largest single party in the 1920's, but it
infrequently participated in organizing a government, both because of its own
finely honed principles and because non-socialists tended to shy away from any
of the socialist parties.

The usual process for organizing a government was this. The President, Friedrich
Ebert until 1925 and General von Hindenburg thereafter, would select some member
of the Reichstag, usually a man with influence in his own party, to form a
government. He would usually then begin negotiations with other party leaders to
get their support for a government. The coalitions so formed were unstable, and
one government followed another in dreary fashion throughout the twenties.
Disaffection with the republic was always widespread, and the succession of
compromise governments increased the frustration with the system.

## A Political Standoff

One thing that this standoff of parties did do; it prevented any of the
governments from taking very drastic or radical action. As one history notes,
the Weimar Republic was largely the creation of the Social Democrats, but "it
was remote from anything socialistic. No industries were nationalized. No
property changed hands. No land laws or agrarian reforms were undertaken…; there
was almost no confiscation… of… property…."[^9_3]

It may be technically true that there was little confiscation of property, but
there was, nonetheless, a massive and catastrophic redistribution of wealth. It
came by way of the runaway inflation in 1922-23. The government flooded the
country with paper money in ever-larger doses; the purpose, ostensibly, was to
repudiate the reparations debt and resist French occupation of the Ruhr. It
failed on both counts, but it succeeded in wiping out domestic debt and
virtually producing economic collapse. By November of 1923 it required over 2½
*trillion* marks to purchase a dollar. Shortly thereafter the inflation was
ended, but such faith in the government as there had ever been was seriously
eroded.

## Sharp Conflict of Ideologies in the Reichstag

The conflict of ideologies was sharp and acrimonious in the Reichstag. When
President Hindenburg entered the hall for his inauguration in 1925, the
Communist members rose *en masse *and walked out. Nazis and Communists were
generally considered to be pariahs to other members. Non-socialists generally
resisted association with socialists. Votes were often dictated by parties on
ideological grounds. Here is an example of such a vote. It concerned the
building of an armored cruiser. The Social Democrats, who were militant
anti-militarists, had campaigned against the building of such a cruiser. The
Communists, not to be outdone, circulated a petition around the country to bar
armored cruisers. These events then took place:

> When the Reichstag reassembled..., the Social Democratic delegation moved that
> the construction of Cruiser A be halted. This move naturally evoked strong and
> angry reactions from the other ministers and their parties… Such a step could
> well have had serious consequences for the entire government. All this could
> have been foreseen. But the dogmatists among the Social Democrats forced a
> resolution through the delegation, requiring that *all* party members,
> including the Social Democratic ministers, support the delegation's motion en
> bloc. Even the President's personal suggestion that the ministers be at least
> permitted to abstain found no mercy at the hands of the delegation's majority.
> Thus, on November 17, 1928, the German Reichstag witnessed the grotesque
> spectacle of chancellor Hermann Miller voting against a decision which a
> cabinet he had chosen had passed with him in the chair.[^9_4]

The motion failed, but if it had passed the world might have been treated to the
unusual spectacle of the fall of a government because its premier had voted with
the majority!

But what went on in the Reichstag was generally peaceful and tame compared to
what was happening around the country during much of the 1920's. The ideological
conflict was hardly restricted to even the vigorous expression of ideas. Private
armies, if not commonplace, were not unusual in the 1920's. A Red army existed
for a time in 1920. It was organized in the wake of the Kapp Putsch in March of
the same year.

A renegade brigade of the German army was used to drive the government out of
Berlin and install Wolfgang Kapp at its head. A general strike paralyzed Berlin
and much of the country, and Kapp capitulated. As the troops withdrew from the
city, this startling incident occurred: "As they marched along the Unter den
Linden, a boy in the crowd hooted at them. Some soldiers broke ranks, hurled
themselves on the boy, clubbed him to death with their rifle butts and then
stomped him with their hobnailed boots. The crowd shouted in horror, while the
soldiers calmly returned to their column. Infuriated by the shouts of the crowd,
an officer wheeled round and ordered his troops to shoot into it with rifles and
machine guns. Then they marched out of Berlin, singing."[^9_5]

## Fed by Violence

The Nazi movement fed on the ideological conflicts and the violence which they
engendered. Hitler began to gain his following with speeches in beer halls in
Munich. Violence often served as a backdrop for his emotional tirades. Hitler's
private army was probably organized at first to protect him in these situations
as well as to provide the violent setting. Here is an account of one of these
conflicts:

> A sudden shout from a Communist took him [Hitler] by surprise; he faltered
> when replying; and suddenly they were all standing up shouting and hurling
> beer mugs.  There was a deafening chorus of "Freiheit!" Tables were being torn
> apart so the legs could be used as clubs. The storm troopers… formed flying
> columns to wrestle with the Communists. One of the columns was led by Rudolf
> Hess who had already shown himself to be a formidable fighter. They used
> fists, chair legs, and beer mugs…. When the battle was won, Hermann Esser
> jumped on a beer table and shouted: "The meeting continues. The speaker has
> the floor."[^9_6]

Hitler then finished his speech. Hitler did not wait long before trying to go on
to bigger things. With the aid of General Ludendorf he attempted a *coup d'etat*
in what is known as the Munich Putsch in 1923. It failed, and Hitler was
subsequently arrested, tried and convicted of treason, and sentenced to prison.
He served only a little more than eight months of the term before he was
released, but while in prison he worked on his book, *Mein Kampf.* The book is
an attempt not only to set forth his ideology and methods but also to give them
a historical gloss by providing what purported to be the historical record of
the Aryan race.

There were other private armies in the service of ideology in the 1920's. The
largest of these was one organized by the Social Democratic Party, mainly in
Saxony and Thuringia. It was called the Reichsbanner, and was founded in
February of 1924. The Reichsbanner was supposed to defend the republic from its
enemies, but that did not change the fact that it was a private army, composed
mainly of Social Democrats. Within a short time, it had three million
members.[^9_7]

## Calm Before Storm

The German deterioration did not proceed on a straight line from bad to worse to
revolution in the 1920's. If the Nazis, or the Communists, or whatever radical
party, had brought off a revolution in late 1923 or early 1924 that would have
been the case. The worst disorders—the initial revolt of the soldier's and
worker's councils, the disintegration of the army, the Kapp Putsch, the
assassinations of Eisner, Rathenau and Erzberger, the revolt of the Red army,
the Munich Putsch, the runaway inflation—occurred from 1918 through 1923.

The Weimar Republic weathered these and other disorders. Indeed, the political
situation appeared to have stabilized from 1924-1929. A stable currency was
introduced, the economy revived, the Allies began to grant concessions, foreign
money began to pour into Germany, and the people enjoyed something approaching
domestic tranquility for a few years. If Hindenburg's election to the presidency
did not increase attachment to the republic, it at least reassured monarchists
and nationalists that they were not without friends in high places. Even Hitler
was more restrained for a time, as he concentrated his energies on developing a
national following.

It was, of course, the calm before the storm.

The Weimar Republic survived for about fourteen years, more by luck than by
design. It survived for want of a generally acceptable alternative—the
socialists would not entertain the idea of restoration of the monarchy, and
those who despised the republic could not unite behind a common banner—and,
perhaps, because those who would make a revolution could not find a handle for
bringing it off.

## From Crisis to Collapse

The French Republic survived the years from World War I to World War II without
collapsing, and France had many political parties, revolving-door governments,
sharp ideological conflicts, and a similar deterioration to that of Germany. But
France had not suffered the German defeat, had not experienced a runaway
inflation, and was not so clearly poised on the brink of revolution. Even so, it
should be noted that the French Republic collapsed in less than five weeks in
1940 under pressure from German, then Italian armies. It required only a
sufficient crisis to bring about collapse.

That crisis for Germany was the Great Depression. Many countries were hit by
depression after 1929, but none harder than Germany. The foreign money which had
poured into Germany after the adoption of the Dawes Plan was no longer
available. Liquidity preference in Germany evinced itself in many instances in
the transfer of bank accounts to other lands. Unemployment mounted. There were
reparation payments to be made. Germany's unemployment insurance program placed
a heavy burden upon the government and upon those who were working. By 1930, or
in the course of the year, there was widespread agreement about the necessity of
emergency measures.

Hitler was waiting in the wings, indeed, had been waiting for some time. The
Nazi Party vote grew rapidly as the crisis deepened. It is not generally
understood how cleverly Hitler had constructed the Nazi ideology, and never will
be by those who insist on forcing it into a "left wing" or "right wing" mold. It
is neither of these, if there are any such ideologies.

## Broadening the Base

The Nazi ideology cut across the spectrum of German parties and ideologies. It
was clearly designed to draw from all of them while being none of them. It
claimed to be national, hence appealing to those concerned to establish national
unity and military prowess. It claimed to be *socialist,* thus appealing to
those for whom socialism was the elixir for modern man. It claimed to be
*German,* which in its own freighted framework meant racist and anti-Semitic,
and racism and anti-Semitism had much potential appeal in Germany, as elsewhere.
And it was, it said, the party of *workers.* There is no way of knowing how much
design went into the choice of words here. Hitler built his initial following on
the base of a worker's party; hence the term might simply have been taken over
without much thought.  Whatever the case may be, he did seek to build his
support on a broad base of manual workers. Beyond these, he proposed to go
further than monarchy by establishing the leadership principle, i.e., personal
dictatorship.

None of the existing parties could get a majority by their sectarian ideological
appeals. He would draw from the several leading parties and ignore the
established spectrum of parties. There were those, of course, from whom he would
not attempt to draw. He was anti-Communist, anti-Semitic, anti-democratic, and
anti-republican. These were the enemies: democrats were too ineffectual to merit
anything more than his contempt, but Jews and Communists (quite often
indistinguishable to Hitler) were powerful enemies to be overcome.

From the elements to which he would appeal Hitler intended to weld a powerful
collective unity. Whether he could ever have got a majority in a free election
is now a moot question. He came close enough to it to achieve his purpose of
attaining power.

Next: *10. Germany: National Socialism in Power.*

[^9_1]: Clarence B. Carson, *The Flight from Reality* (Irvington, N. Y., FEE:
  1969), p.  302.

[^9_2]: Arnold *J.* Heidenheimer, *The Government of Germany* (New York: Thomas
  Y. Crowell, 1971, 3rd ed.), p. 4.

[^9_3]: R. R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A *History of the Modern World* (New York:
  Alfred A. Knopf, 1958, rev. ed.), pp. 759-60.

[^9_4]: Erich Eyck, A *History of the Weimar Republic,* II (Cambridge: Harvard
  University Press, 1963), p. 164.

[^9_5]: Robert Payne, *The Life and Death of Adolf Hitler* (New York: Praeger,
1973), p. 151.

[^9_6]: *lbid.,* pp. 161-62.

[^9_7]: See S. William Halperin, *Germany Tried Democracy* (New York: W. W.
  Norton, 1946), pp. 285-86.

