# World in the Grip of an Idea: 10. Germany - National Socialism in Power

[Saturday, October 1,
1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/october-1977/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

In the presence of his prospective cabinet and before President Hindenburg of
the Weimar Republic, Adolf Hitler intoned these words on the morning of January
30, 1933: "I will employ my strength for the welfare of the German people,
protect the Constitution and laws of the German people, conscientiously
discharge the duties imposed on me and conduct my affairs of office
impartially and with justice to everyone." So saying, he was sworn as
Chancellor of the Republic. The other members of the cabinet having taken their
oaths, Hitler affirmed his good intentions to the President in a brief speech.
Hindenburg, who had delayed asking Hitler to form a government for months,
looked as if he were about to make reply but instead dismissed them with his
favorite formula: "And now, gentlemen, forward with God!"[^10_1]

Within months of this ceremony about the only relic of the Weimar Republic still
standing was President Hindenburg, and he would not survive much longer. A Nazi
Revolution had taken place, was, as a matter of fact, still in process. This
revolution was accompanied by the standard concomitants of modern revolution:
suppression of liberty, confiscation of property, concentration camps,
persecution of classes or categories of people, terror, and violence. The terror
that gripped Germany in the mid-1930's was soon extended beyond German
boundaries and during World War II threatened much of the world, if not all of
it.

Ever since, indeed, beginning while it was going on, a great deal of ink has
been spilled in attempts to account for Hitler and Nazism. One main approach has
been to try to explain the violence, brutality, and viciousness of Nazism by
what may be called a biographical-psychological examination of the leaders.
Thus, Hitler, Goering, Goebbels, Himmler, and others are studied in order to
discover their frustrations, quirks, sexual inadequacies, deprivations, and
other origins of their hatreds. For example, a psychological study of Hitler
made during World War II speculated that his disorders might have begun with
misguided toilet training due to the excessive neatness and cleanliness of his
mother. Anyone familiar with the literature knows of the reputed homosexuality
of Ernst Roehm (organizer of the ill-famed SA—"Storm Troopers") and of the drug
taking of Hermann Goering, for example.

## How Nazism Gained Support in Germany

The major difficulty with the biographical approach, aside from the speculative
nature of so much of it, is that while it may shed some light on the origins of
the brutishness of Hitler and his henchmen it does not explain their success in
gaining the support of so many Germans. For this, there is a supplementary
explanation. It is to be accounted for by something in the German character.

Although the collective guilt of Germans for Nazi acts was officially rejected
by the Nuremberg Trials after World War II, this did not keep it from being
widely believed and frequently imputed to them by writers and commentators. The
Germans have been accused of being especially drawn to authoritarian
governments. This has been attributed by some to Martin Luther and the Lutheran
Church. (But surely, it could be argued, if Luther was an authoritarian he was
no more so than the Catholic Church. If this were once admitted, however, the
specifically German character of this penchant would be refuted.) There are many
variations on the Nazism-as-a-phenomenon-attributable – to – something –
Germanic theme. Some focus on Prussian militarism, others on latent
anti-Semitism, and so on.

Whatever the motives of those who advance the biographical-Germanic explanation
(combined, usually, with the notion that Hitler belonged to the "right wing"),
the impact is to disentangle and separate Nazism from what is crucially
necessary to understanding it. The biographical-Germanic approach tends to make
it *sui generis,* something peculiar to Germany. Those who add the supposed
"right wing" attribute do attempt to universalize it but confine it to movements
which either do not exist or have no common ground in the contemporary world.

A simple story may both show the fatuousness of some of these attempts at
explanation and lead us toward an understanding of the character of Nazism. The
story is about a scene which the present writer witnessed a good many years ago
on the outskirts of the small German town Herzogenaurah. It is but a few miles
from the seat of a well-known university at Erlangen but has no claim to fame or
notice of its own. Another American soldier and I were walking along the road on
a late summer afternoon. We heard a commotion up ahead and saw there were
perhaps a dozen children involved in it. As we approached them, we made out what
was going on. The children were chasing, taunting, and otherwise harassing a
deformed person. Whether we broke it up or whether it was done by some older
German escapes my memory, but it was broken up. The details have faded, but the
shameful incident has stuck in my memory.

## Intolerable Differences

What is to be made of this incident, of this cruel attack by children, ganged
up, on a deformed and helpless person? My first reaction, as I recall it, was
quite conventional. What I had witnessed was the coming out of some loathsome
trait in the German character. Or, the thought occurs to me now, perhaps the
children should have been rounded up and taken to a psychiatrist in order to
determine what it was in their earlier childhood that had bent them to
participate in this particular cruel mischief. Mature reflection, however,
convinces me that such approaches to an explanation are to be rejected.

What is misleading about this incident is that the person ganged up on and
attacked was deformed. Once it is understood that this was incidental, what
happened is all too commonplace. The person was not attacked because he (or she)
was deformed but because he was *different.* It happens every day many times
over. Children gang up to taunt and harass someone or other in their midst who
is in some way different. The target often changes from day to day.

The present writer recalls having been beset by what seems to have been the
whole female contingent of his eighth grade class when he announced that he was
in favor of Wendell Willkie instead of Roosevelt for President. The community
was pro-Roosevelt Democratic, and I was, for a moment, a threat to its
solidarity. Such behavior is almost as natural to children us pecking to death
one of their number which develops an open sore is to barnyard fowls. Adults are
not immune to it, though when they are trying to appear civilized they claim
when they are picking on someone who is different that they are only teasing.

Nonetheless, herein lie the roots of collectivism. It is sometimes supposed that
the wellspring of collectivism is envy. Undoubtedly, envy sometimes plays a role
in collectivism, but it is not clear that it is essential. What is essential is
the longing to be at one with some dominant group or order or class of people
and to expel and, perhaps, destroy all who do not belong to it. It is, as H. L.
Mencken once noted, the longing for the warm smell of the herd. It is powered
much more by hatred than envy, hatred for the alien in the midst, the one who is
different, and who thus disrupts the supposed unity. (This is mostly nonsense,
of course, since such unity as exists arises from the focus on the alien. Expel
the alien, and the differences among those in the "unified" group begin to stand
out once again.)

None of us is immune to the collective urge. No doubt the Germans have it but so
also do the French, the English, the Italians, the Russians, the Hottentots and
the Bantu: the Jew and the Gentile, white and black, Protestant and Catholic,
Oriental and Occidental. It may even be an urge which the human race shares with
the lower animals. Nor is the collective urge necessarily and always productive
of evil. When it is confined, restrained, limited, and civilized it enables us
to enjoy the good fellowship and share in productive efforts with those of like
mind and spirit. But when it is powered by hate, ideologized, and joined with
the power of government—let loose to employ force—it is dangerous, wanton, and
destructive. It becomes collectivism—the idea that has the world in its grip.
The reason for including Nazism in this account is that some aspects of
collectivism come out more clearly in it than elsewhere.

## The Politics of Collectivism

Adolf Hitler was a master of what for want of a better phrase may be called the
Politics of Collectivism. The phrase has probably never had any currency because
we do not ordinarily think of collectivism as having a politics. After all,
politics has to do with persuasion, with compromise, with composing differences,
and with gaining office or position. By contrast, collectivism has to do with
concerting all energy behind a set of objectives, with the crushing of
dissidence, and with the removal of offending elements. Politics entails the
modes of behavior of those who would gain and hold favor when people are free to
accept or reject them, in ordinary usage.

Even so, there is what may be called a politics of collectivism. It entails the
methods of operation by which total power is attained and imposed. It is the
means by which a collectivist gets the weight of the populace behind him. When
Lenin attempted it, he provoked civil war. Stalin achieved it, in so far as he
did, by extensive and prolonged terror. Hitler used terror, too, but much more
selective terror than Stalin, and it was coupled with other equally effective
methods. His mastery of the politics a collectivism can best be understood by
exploring his methods.

Hitler's methods are revealed in Nazi ideology. Indeed, the ideology was itself
a method of gaining and imposing power. There was always a tendency not to take
Nazi ideology seriously, and for good reason. The intellectual level of it, in
*Mein Kampf*, which is the major exposition of it, is very low. It is difficult
to take a writer seriously who breaks into a historical discourse with
statements about bowlegged Jews seducing young blonde German maidens, and that
in the coarsest and most vulgar language. It is possible to laugh or cry at such
hyperbole but hardly to take it seriously. Yet, as it turned out, Hitler was
serious, perhaps even sincere, and Nazi ideology requires careful examination.

## Emotional Appeal

Nazi ideology, that is, Hitler's ideology, was not an intellectual system. It
was not arrived at by deduction from self-evident truths (praxiological) nor by
analysis (dialectics) nor built up from the facts (inductive). Probably the
least important aspect of Nazi ideology, to Hitler, was whether it was true or
false. He was not interested in improving people's minds but in attracting
followers; his appeal was not to the intellect but to the feelings. If Hitler
had been reliably informed that the incidence of bowleggedness among Jewish men
was much less than that for the German populace as a whole, it is most doubtful
that he would have revised *Mein Kampf* to accord with the new information.

Nazi ideology was a compound of what may be best characterized as beer hall or,
in the American idiom, barroom exposition. The amount of alcohol that makes the
generality of people convivial turns some people into public speakers. Such a
person is likely enough to become a loudmouthed expounder of ideas, taking for
listeners any and all who are in the vicinity, though one will often serve as
well as ten. He will expound at length on what is wrong with the world and how
it can all be set right. Such a person may have a considerable fund of
information, a good memory for striking detail, and be fairly well acquainted
with popular ideas. However, he prefers monologue (his) to discussion, requires
at most an occasional nod for encouragement, and will not brook disagreement
with what he is saying. His ideas are to thought what Hollywood mock-ups are to
buildings, imitations which could hardly bear close examination.

## Gaining Followers

Hitler's main discovery was how to make such talk productive in getting
followers. The beer hall, or barroom, habitué who becomes a public speaker under
the influence does not attract followers; on the contrary, he is probably hard
put to find drinking companions. We can surmise, if we think about it, why it is
that he probably does not attract followers. It is not that he fails to take his
ideas seriously or that many of those about him do not share his prejudices. It
is rather that he does not take *himself* seriously. Everyone knows that
regardless of how cogent his ideas, the talkative drinker is not going to do
anything about them. He is only going to talk about them. Hitler learned how to
make such talk attract followers. He learned how in the course of numerous
meetings in beer halls in Munich in the early 1920's.

Hitler did take himself seriously. (There is no reason to suppose that he was
one of those who become public speakers under the influence, for he cared little
for alcohol. His beverage was power, not alcohol.) The problem was how to get
others to take him seriously and join forces with him. The way he discovered was
to remove all doubt that he would act, all doubt that he meant business. Those
who ventured to attend one of his meetings stood a good chance of witnessing the
Nazi determination to act. Hitler did not hold seminars in Nazi doctrine; he
arranged "happenings" as a backdrop to his fervent speeches. Any person or group
which expressed their disagreement vocally was beaten up and thrown out of the
meeting. He neither invited differences of opinion, nor did he tolerate them.
The violent attacks on those who disagreed signified a determination and
willingness to act. Those who did not take Hitler seriously in his meetings
could suffer a broken head for their oversight. There was more to it than this,
of course. Hitler was an astute student of mass psychology. His meetings were a
bizarre form of entertainment. He usually charged admission during the early
years. The Storm Troopers would be in attendance, the threat of violence in the
air, the beer hall the setting, and then the main fare, his speech. He scheduled
speeches for the nighttime whenever possible, for, as he noted in *Mein Kampf,*
people are more readily influenced at night. He usually spoke at great length,
two or more hours. The critical powers of the mind decline as the posterior
grows numb, and it is at this juncture that the demagogue can be most effective.
Hitler could play on the vagrant prejudices which come to the fore as the mind
ceases to discipline its contents; he could project feelings of discomfort onto
the enemy of his choosing, thereby transforming discomfort into hatred.

All this would probably have been of no account without ideology. Hitler claims
to have given considerable attention to various ideologies, particularly to
Marxism both in its Communist and Social Democratic formulations, and to the
various nationalist dogmas. He perceived, too, what must be their fatal error.
They could not act decisively and forcefully. They tended to divisions among
themselves which weakened them and made them irresolute. The solution to this
that he hit upon was to have a single authoritative leader, though the idea may
not have originated with him since Lenin had already exemplified it. But this
would not solve the problem if the ideology divided the population drastically.
It was in solving this problem that Hitler showed himself the consummate
politician of collectivism.

## Marxism Is Divisive

Marxism as an ideology divides the people. With its focus upon and almost total
reliance upon the proletariat, it alienates the rest of the population. Its
atheism alienated Christians. Its internationalism, which Hitler ascribed to
Marx's having been a Jew, failed to muster the national spirit of a people. Even
so, Hitler gleaned much from Marxism. He believed Marxism to be right in
destroying before making a revolution:

> It indicates a lack of deep insight into historical developments when today
> people who call themselves folkish make a great point of assuring us over and
> over that they do not plan to engage in negative criticism, but only in
> constructive work…. Marxism also had a goal, and it, too, has a constructive
> activity…; but previously, nevertheless, it practiced criticism for seventy
> years, annihilating, disintegrating criticism, and again criticism, which
> continued until the old state was undermined by this persistent corrosive acid
> and brought to collapse. Only then did its actual "construction" work begin.
> And that was self-evident, correct and logical.[^10_2]

He denied that the success of the Marxists arose from the complicated Marxian
literature. Instead:

> What has won the millions of workers for Marxism is less the literary style of
> the Marxist church fathers than the indefatigable and truly enormous
> propaganda work of tens of thousands of untiring agitators, from the great
> agitator down to the small trade-union official and the shop steward and
> discussion speaker….[^10_3]

## The Führer Principle

Hitler described his ideology as the "folkish philosophy." He said:

> The folkish philosophy is basically distinguished from the Marxist philosophy
> by the fact that it not only recognizes the value of race, but with it the
> importance of personality, which it therefore makes one of the pillars of its
> entire edifice.[^10_4]

What Hitler refers to as the "importance of personality" should be understood as
the importance of leaders and the Führer principle. Actually, as Hitler noted,
Communists have had to rely on "leaders." Hitler is quoted on this point,
however, more to show that he was aware of or claimed similarity with the
Marxists than for the acuteness of his distinction.

The major tactical difference between Nazism and communism was that Nazi
ideology was not nearly so divisive. Hitler sought to forge an organic unity of
the German people (excluding Jews and convinced Marxists, whom Hitler thought of
as "ideologized Jews"). He would bind the Germans—industrialists, workers,
military, and civil service—into a great productive and creative unity. To avoid
dividing them, he steered clear of specific programs. As to what would be done
economically, he said: "I had at that time and still possess today the
unshakable conviction that it is dangerous to tie up a great
politico-philosophical struggle with economic matters at too early a
time."[^10_5] He inveighed, too, against those who would try to tie the Nazi
Party to either a Protestant or Catholic base. This would only serve to divide
rather than unite the people.

## Hitler's Use of Religion

The way Hitler used the Christian religion deserves more space than it can be
given here. While Hitler was almost certainly a pagan, he frequently spoke as if
he were the leading defender of Christianity and conscientiously doing the will
of God. Typically, he could effect being most pious when appealing for racial
purity. Instead of preaching celibacy, he declares at one place, the Church
ought to enjoin racial mixing, and by this "admonition finally to put an end to
the constant and continuous original sin of racial poisoning, and to give the
Almighty Creator beings such as He Himself created."[^10_6] Of course, Hitler
did not derive this doctrine from Christianity at all; he was using phrases and
ideas drawn from Christianity to give a religious gloss to his own ideology.

## Setting the Stage

Nazi ideology was concocted from German mythology, from the emanations of other
contemporary ideologies, from anti-Semitism, and from Pan Germanism. Hitler
intuited the ideological temper of the age and mixed a brew which would appeal
to it. He was probably incapable of extended reasoning and he was certainly
undisciplined to submitting conclusions to the test of evidence. He made contact
with ideas at the point at which they have largely come loose from whatever gave
rise to them. In this, he resembled the barroom talker. But, unlike our
imaginary talker, he did not simply express them; he wove them into an ideology
by repetition, by the skillful merging of images, by using his powerful will to
hold them together. There was something demonic about his ability to express
ideas that had a wide currency in Germany —that were popular and appeared to
derive from the people—and yet to give every one of them his own context.

The Nazi ideology, though, should be thought of as a script to a play. People do
not, by and large, read the script; they much prefer to watch the performance,
to see the words take on life, to see them entwined with the action. If anyone
was ever won over to Nazism by reading *Mein Kampf* he has yet to be heard from.
But many were drawn into the movement as the play began to unfold.

Hitler was a revolutionary, a revolutionary socialist mayhap, certainly a
revolutionary collectivist. He made no secret of his revolutionary intent.
*"National Socialism as a matter of principle,"* he said, *"must lay claim to
the right to force its principles on the whole German nation…. It must determine
and reorder the life of a people…."*[^10_7] Its purpose was to be realized by
"tearing down a world and building another in its place…."[^10_8] Hitler did
not, of course, specify much of what was to be torn down and he only promised
that an organic unity would take its place.

Even though Hitler was a revolutionary, following his stint in prison in the mid
1920's he set upon a course of trying to come to power by popular support. There
is no reason to suppose that his punishment had converted him to legality, but
it may have helped him to see the futility of any attempted seizure of power.
Germany was much more ready to fall apart than it was to be pulled together by
revolution. Anyone who grabbed a particular power in Germany might well see it
evaporate in his hand.

If the Reichstag were taken over, its powers might revert to the states. If the
army chieftains submitted, the soldiers might refuse to fight. The unions could
bring a revolution to naught, if it did not suit them, by a general strike.
Control of Prussia was undoubtedly the key to the control of Germany (assuming
that Catholic Germany did not then secede), but that was hardly easier for
Hitler to achieve than control over all of Germany simultaneously. As much as he
despised elections, they offered the most likely route to power.

## Rebuilding the Party

The failure of the Munich *Putsch* in 1923 and the subsequent imprisonment of
Hitler and other Nazis all but destroyed the Nazi Party. When Hitler got out of
prison, the task of getting electoral support appeared almost insuperable. The
Party had to be rebuilt, his own control of it reasserted, and if it were to be
anything but a Bavarian party it would have to make a beginning along these
lines. The leader of the Storm Troopers, Ernst Roehm, had left the country, and
that branch of the movement would have to be rebuilt. Most of the German states
prohibited Hitler from making speeches, thus stilling his most effective method
of gaining followers. In the face of these difficulties, Hitler did manage to
revive and rebuild the Party, and the restrictions were eventually removed. Even
so, in the Reichstag elections of 1928 the Nazis only got a sufficient
percentage of the vote to name 12 deputies, 12 out of 491!

As noted earlier, the Depression gave Hitler his opportunity. As unemployment
rose in Germany, so did the Nazi vote. In the election held in September of 1930
the Nazi Party got the second largest number of delegates in the Reichstag,
second only to the Social Democratic Party. But they still had only 107 of 577
total delegates. The crucial fact, however, was that with the growth in delegate
strength of the Nazi and Communist parties, none of the three configurations of
non-revolutionary parties which usually formed governments could muster a
majority. If a grand coalition of parties of the center plus the Social
Democrats could have been formed it would have commanded support from only about
250 delegates. The old center parties had only 107 delegates. The nationalists
could probably not have mustered 90.

Heinrich Bruning was named Chancellor and formed a government which had
representatives from parties with only 137 delegates. The Social Democratic
Party did not participate in the government, but Bruning was only able to
maintain power with its tacit support. He turned increasingly to rule by
emergency decrees issued in conjunction with President Hindenburg in order to be
able to function and still avoid votes in the Reichstag which would bring about
the fall of the government. "In 1930 the Reichstag passed ninety-eight laws. In
1931 the number fell to thirty-four, while Hindenburg issued forty-two emergency
decrees. In 1932 the Reichstag passed only five laws, while Hindenburg issued
sixty decrees."[^10_9]

## The 1932 Elections

The Reichstag elections held in 1932 help to explain this virtual parliamentary
collapse. In the elections held in July of that year the Nazis became the
leading party with 230 delegates in the Reichstag. The Communists had been
gaining with each election and now had 89. Together the Nazis and Communists
commanded 319 votes, a majority. There was, of course, no possibility that the
two would form a government and work together, but they could and would combine,
by a vote of no confidence, to bring down at will any government named. It
apparently meant, too, that the German voters had opted for revolution, though
who should bring it about, whether Nazis or Communists, was not yet clear. It
was ominous, too, that the vote for the more moderate parties had been steadily
declining. The Democratic Party, such voice as nineteenth century liberalism
had, elected only four delegates to the Reichstag. The German People's Party had
only seven. Even the Social Democratic Party had been steadily declining in
popularity.

Hindenburg had already tapped Franz von Papen to be Chancellor, and he formed a
government from the center and nationalist parties. But he threw away whatever
chance he might have had for tacit support from the Social Democratic Party
(which would not have provided him with a majority in the Reichstag after the
elections, in any case) by taking over the government of Prussia and driving the
Social Democrats out. This was a fortuitous event for Hitler, for when he was
made Chancellor he also took over the government of the largest state in
Germany.

## No Ruling Majority

It may well have been that Pa-pen's control of the government and the police in
Prussia, which included the city of Berlin, prevented a Communist uprising, for
Berlin was the center of Communist strength. The government ordered, too, the
disbanding of the Nazi SA (Storm Troopers), but this order was shortly
rescinded. Papen might govern without the Social Democrats but not without some
sort of assent from the Nazis. In any case, Papen was dependent upon Hindenburg
and his emergency decrees for the day to day governing of Germany.

The Reichstag had no sooner assembled after the election than the Communists
proposed a no confidence vote in the Papen government. It carried by the
whopping vote of 512 to 42. Hermann Goering, the Nazi President of the
Reichstag, prevented Papen from filing a dissolution order from Hindenburg which
would have forestalled the test. Hitler had already refused to come into the
Papen government as Vice Chancellor, insisting that he must head any government
in which the Nazis participated. Hindenburg could not accept that solution at
this time. So, there was little to be done but call for a new election.

The Reichstag election held in November of 1932 hardly improved matters. The
Nazis lost a few delegates; the Communists gained a few; the National Party
gained a few, and the Social Democrats lost a few. The Nazis and Communists
combined still commanded a majority of the delegates. For once, however, the
Nazis allowed the Reichstag to hold a few sessions without a crisis until it
adjourned. Hindenburg called upon General Kurt von Schleicher to form a
government. He maneuvered to try to get the support of enough parties to govern
but in such a way that he lost whatever trust he had among party leaders. He
tried to divide the Nazi Party by bringing Gregor Strasser into his cabinet.
Strasser refused, and Hitler was furious with Schleicher. In like manner, he
attempted to get support from the Social Democrats but succeeded only in
irritating the leadership of that party. Meanwhile, Franz von Papen, who had
earlier been a protege of Schleicher, began to maneuver behind his back.

## Hitler As Chancellor

With the January 31, 1933 meeting of the Reichstag facing him, Schleicher
recognized that he could not govern. Most likely, the delegates would hardly
have been seated before he would have been subjected to a no confidence vote as
humiliating as that received earlier by Papen. There was one way, he thought,
by which he could govern and Hitler could be prevented from coming to power.
President Hindenburg should dissolve the Reichstag, grant him emergency powers
to govern, and suppress the Nazis and Communists before any new elections were
called, if any were called. Hindenburg would not agree to this course, and
Schleicher resigned.

At this juncture, Hindenburg asked Hitler to become Chancellor of a new
government. Historians, with perfect hindsight, have found fault with
Hindenburg's decision ever since. He was, after all, 85 years old and was almost
certainly becoming senile. But if Hindenburg had been at the height of his
intellectual powers, there is little reason to suppose he would have acted
differently. He was on the horns of a dilemma. To follow Schleicher's proposal
would be to make him, or someone else, dictator. It would almost certainly mean
the end of constitutional government and the Weimar Republic as well.
(Hindenburg's honor was involved here, for he had pledged himself to obey the
Constitution and uphold the Republic.) Even then, there was no assurance that
whoever he chose as dictator could govern, and Hindenburg did know this. Such a
dictator would have to depend upon the regular army (the *Reichswehr*).

But could the army impose a dictator on Germany? Hindenburg doubted it, and for
good reason. The Treaty of Versailles, not Hindenburg, was to blame for this
state of affairs. The army was restricted to 100,000 men, and the morale of
those was an uncertain factor. Paramilitary forces vastly outnumbered the army,
and many of them were armed and wore uniforms. Officers in the SA had been seen
for some time swaggering about requiring regular army personnel to salute them.
Any attempt at suppressing the Communists might bring forth a general strike
from the unions. What Schleicher proposed would, at the least, suspend the
Constitution and most likely bring civil war. That was one horn of the dilemma.

The other horn was Hitler. For all his blustering, crudeness, and vulgarity—this
was well known—he was still an unknown quantity in one sense. He had not yet had
the authority or responsibility for governing. Might not responsibility sober
and tame him? Might not the necessity for getting a majority in the Reichstag
restrain him? More, the cabinet might hold him in check. The Nazis were to have
only two posts besides that of Chancellor. Papen was to serve as Vice
Chancellor, and he was no wild man. Hugenburg, the head of the Nationalist
Party, had a strong and tenacious personality; Hitler needed his party, and had
him in the cabinet. Hindenburg detested Hitler, had delayed as long as he could
raising him to power, but had finally to act. Reassured by his advisers, he made
the fateful appointment.

Anyone dealt such a hand at cards as Hindenburg held, to change the figure of
speech, should have asked for a new deal. Hindenburg already had, of course, but
another election had left him holding the same cards, so to speak. Was there
really any reason to hope that yet another election would bring about any great
change? So, hoping for the best, Hindenburg listened to the cabinet being sworn
and gave them his charge with his familiar parting words: "And now, gentlemen,
forward with God!" Hitler was not a gentleman—far from it. Germany did not go
forward with God; instead, it went down with Adolf Hitler. At last, Hitler had
the opportunity to prove that he was serious.

He was serious. He meant every word he had written and spoken, and more.

Next: *11. The Promise and the Terror.*

[^10_1]: Eliot B. Wheaton, *Prelude to Calamity: The Nazi Revolution* 1933-35
  (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1968), pp. 202-03.

[^10_2]: Adolf Hitler, *Mein Kampf,* trans. Ralph Manheim (Boston: Houghton
  Mifflin, 1943), p. 453.

[^10_3]: *lbid.,* p. 472.

[^10_4]: *Ibid.,* p. 448.

[^10_5]: *Ibid.,* p. 604.

[^10_6]: *Ibid.,* p. 405.

[^10_7]: *Ibid.,* pp. 577-78.

[^10_8]: *Ibid.,* p. 581.

[^10_9]: Wheaton, *op. c* p. 97.

