# World in the Grip of an Idea: 12. Nazi-Soviet Parallels, Part 1

[Thursday, December 1, 1977](https://fee.org/the-freeman/december-1977/)

On August 21, 1939, a shocking announcement was made in Moscow: the Nazi
*government* of Germany and the Communist government of the Soviet Union had
reached an agreement. It was billed as a nonaggression pact between the two
countries and has been called by such various names as the Nazi-Soviet Pact, the
von Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact, for the two foreign ministers who negotiated it,
and the Moscow Pact. What was shocking was that these two avowed enemies should
reach an accord; this, plus the dread implications it had for power alignments
in the world. (There were dark rumors in those days of a
Rome-Berlin-Moscow-Tokyo Axis against most of the rest of the world.) The Nazis
were supposed to be on the "extreme right" and the Communists on the "extreme
left" of the ideological spectrum. They had supported opposing sides in the
Spanish Civil War, and Communists were proclaimed anti-Fascists (which included
Nazis) while Nazis trumpeted their anti-Communism. The accord left many
communists around the world facing in the wrong direction, so to speak. The
Nazi-Soviet Pact lasted for nearly two years. The portion that was made public
appeared to be a non-aggression pact. But the secret protocols which accompanied
it made it, in effect, a mutual aggression treaty. Eastern Europe was divided
into spheres of influence between the Nazis and Communists. A few days after the
signing of the pact, German forces invaded Poland, launching World War II. While
Polish forces were more than occupied in the west, the Soviet armies invaded
that hapless country from the east. The defeat of the Poles, which came with
astonishing swiftness, was followed by the division of Poland between Germany
and the Soviet Union.

When Hitler's armies invaded Poland, Britain and France declared war on Germany.
When Stalin's armies invaded Poland, no action was taken against the Soviet
Union. (Some history textbooks do not even mention the Soviet invasion; those
that do, generally do not explore its significance. Less than a year later, when
Italian armies invaded France following the Nazi incursion, President Franklin
Roosevelt declared: "The hand that held the dagger has plunged it into the back
of its neighbor." He might have made the same dramatic remark earlier about the
Soviet Union, but he did not.)

During the ensuing fall and winter, while German and Allied forces were bogged
down in a "phony war," the Germans safe behind the Siegfried Line and the French
and British behind the Maginot Line, the Soviet Union continued its aggressions.
Soviet forces occupied strategic locations in Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania as
a prelude to their annexation. Then, Soviet forces invaded tiny Finland. The
Finns, in one of the more heroic episodes during World War II, held the Soviet
armies at bay for most of the winter before they finally succumbed.

## Twin Aggressors

There was a more appropriate reaction in Western Europe and America to this act
of aggression. The Soviet Union was expelled from the League of Nations, and the
Allies offered military help to Finland but were unable to provide it because
the other Baltic countries would not permit it to pass through their ports. Into
the spring of 1940 the Soviet Union was running "neck and neck" with Germany for
the lead as an aggressor nation. Thereafter, Germany forged ahead with the
invasion of Norway, Denmark, Holland, and Belgium.

The point is this, however: for a brief interlude during the life of the
Nazi-Soviet Pact the affinity of Nazis and Communists was displayed for all to
see, even if many preferred to avert their eyes from the spectacle. This should
not be taken to mean that there were not differences between Nazism and
Communism. It is rather to say that such differences as there were, were
accidental and inorganic. They were differences of focus, of intention, and of
articulation. By contrast, the similarities were organic and essential.

Nazism and Communism are best understood as parallel systems spun from
essentially the same ideological materials. That they were competitors for
dominion over the peoples of the world there should be no doubt, competitors
whose eventual clash with one another may well have been inevitable. But
competition arises from those offering essentially the same product or service,
not from those at opposite ends of the spectrum. Their pact was a temporary
agreement to divide up the territory over which they would hold sway, much as
two giant cartels might agree to divide up the market until such time as one or
the other would be strong enough to begin its incursion into the other's area.

The essential similarities of these parallel systems emerge from a comparison of
them. Their modes of operation and political structure would hardly have been
more nearly alike if they had come from the same mold.

In the first place, both Communists in Russia and Nazis in Germany seized power
by the use of violence. True, the Nazis appeared to come to power legally, but
actually Hitler only got into office legally, not to real power. As has been
shown, the Nazis only attained a parliamentary majority by illegally denying
seats to the Communist Party. In a similar fashion, Hitler got his Enabling Act
by suppressing opponents and terrorizing his collaborators. There was nothing
more than a semblance, if that, of legality in the suppression of political
parties, the subjection of the states, and the subjugation of the labor unions.
The murder of political opponents laid bare just how illegal had been Hitler's
thrust to power. There was never any doubt, of course, that the Bolsheviks
seized power in Russia.

## Minority Rule

Both Nazi and Communist rule was the imposition of the will of the minority on
the majority. Both Nazis and Bolsheviks failed to get a majority in the last
(relatively) free elections held before they consolidated their power and
outlawed opposition parties. The Nazis tried to cover this over by holding
plebiscites, elections in which the alternative was to be for whatever was being
proposed or for nothing, i.e., against it. The Communists have tried over the
years to provide an appearance of popular support for the regime by having
elections in which there is only a single slate of candidates. The people are
asked not to elect but to give approval to what already has been decided.
Actually, since the parliament had no significant power in Nazi Germany and has
none in the Soviet Union, the make-up of them came to be a matter of little
importance.

Nazi Germany was and Soviet Russia is a one-party state. In both cases, once
their leaders came to power, these parties ceased to be political parties, to
the degree that they ever had been, and became instruments of the ruling elite.
They were not originators of policy. How could they be? It is only in opposition
to other parties that party programs have any significance. They became,
instead, tightly knit, fiercely loyal, and militant organizations to support the
will of the rulers.

Nazi Germany had a personal dictatorship. In Nazi theory and practice all power
and authority proceeded from the Führer, the leader, Adolf Hitler. Hitler did
not care at all for administrative detail and spent very little time on it. Some
of the most momentous decisions he made, such as that of the extermination of
the Jews, were not even recorded so far as has been determined. (He may not have
wanted a record, of course, of the decision to exterminate the Jews.) Hitler's
orders were often given out informally to associates and companions, more as
wishes than commands. The method was more that of gangsters than what is
ordinarily expected of prime ministers and heads of state (Hitler was both after
the death of Hindenburg, though he wished to be addressed as "Mein Führer").
Many decisions apparently were handed down at the mid-afternoon dinners when
Hitler was in Berlin. These frequently were attended by Goebbels, Himmler, Hess,
and other leading figures, though rarely by Goering who preferred more sumptuous
fare. Albert Speer, who often attended, put it this way:

> Dining with Hitler regularly meant a considerable loss of time, for we sat at
> table until half past four in the afternoon....
>
> Yet it was important for one's prestige to attend these dinners. Moreover, it
> was important to most of the guests to be kept abreast of Hitler's daily
> opinions. The round table was useful to Hitler himself as well, for in this
> way he could casually and effortlessly hand down a political line or
> slogan.[^12_1]

## Dictators All

The Soviet Union, too, has had a succession of personal dictators. The practice
began with Lenin, reached its apogee with Stalin, and was continued by Malenkov,
Khrushchev, and Brezhnev. Communists usually have made some effort to hide the
personal character of the dictatorship behind a facade of "collective
leadership," but the reality has surfaced too often for it to be generally
believed. In his "Secret Speech to the Twentieth Party Congress," Khrushchev
made clear the personal nature of Stalin's rule:

> Stalin acted not through persuasion, explanation, and patient co-operation
> with people, but by imposing his concepts and demanding absolute submission to
> his opinion. Whoever opposed this concept or tried to prove his viewpoint, and
> the correctness of his position, was doomed to removal from the leading
> collective and to subsequent moral and physical annihilation...[^12_2]

What Khrushchev's remarks may obscure, however, is that while there have been
differences in degree of personal rule, it has been characteristic of communist
governments, whether in the Soviet Union or elsewhere.

There were even parallels in the style of living of Hitler and Stalin. Both men
were "night owls," given to staying up to the wee hours of the morning and
keeping their associates awake with them. They were both addicted to movies,
Hitler's taste running to musicals while Stalin liked American westerns. Stalin
had a screening room for films in the Kremlin, but Hitler had his own "theater"
in his hideaway in Obersalzberg. Both men had warped senses of humor, preferring
jokes at the expense of those around them. Stalin was, if anything, the cruder
of the two. In late night drinking sprees, he was apt to do such things as have
Khrushchev, or others, perform a Russian folk dance in which they lacked all
talent. Both were anti-Semites. Hitler, of course publicized his anti-Semitism,
but Stalin was more circumspect in displaying his. Khrushchev gives these
examples of Stalin's anti-Semitism:

> ... When he happened to talk about a Jew, Stalin often imitated in a well-known
> exaggerated accent the way Jews talk. This is the same way that thickheaded,
> backward people who despise Jews talk when they mock the negative Jewish traits.
> Stalin also liked to put on this accent, and he was pretty good at it.
>
> I remember when I was working in Moscow, some kind of trouble at the Thirtieth
> Aviation Factory was reported to Stalin through Party channels and by State
> Security. During a meeting with Stalin, while we were sitting around exchanging
> opinions, Stalin turned to me and said, "The good workers at the factory should
> be given clubs so they can beat the hell out of those Jews at the end of the
> working day."[^12_3]

If Khrushchev is to be believed, he considered this a direct order from Stalin,
but he did not carry it out.

## A Lonely Position

Both Hitler and Stalin apparently were fearful of being alone, which was the
main reason for keeping people around so late at night. Speer has said of the
late nights with Hitler at Obersalzberg: "From one o'clock on some members of
the company, in spite of all their efforts to control themselves, could no
longer repress their yawns. But the social occasion dragged on in monotonous,
wearing emptiness for another hour or more, until at last Eva Braun had a few
words with Hitler and was permitted to go upstairs. Hitler would stand up about
a quarter of an hour later, to bid his company goodnight."[^12_4] Of Stalin,
Khrushchev says: "He suffered terribly from loneliness. He needed people around
him all the time. When he woke up in the morning, he would immediately summon
us, either inviting us to the movies or starting some conversation.... He was
depressed by loneliness and he feared it."[^12_5]

There are many monstrous aspects to this immense concentration of power in one
man but none more than their role in making war. According to Khrushchev, Stalin
planned military operations on a globe! He never visited the front lines and
could not be persuaded to consult detailed maps. Khrushchev told in detail the
effects of this on one operation. It was in the Kharkov region in 1942. Stalin
had ordered a massive encirclement operation. Those who were on the scene
perceived the great danger of trying to carry it out. However, it was most
difficult to reach Stalin on the matter, and when he finally was contacted he
insisted that the operation must be carried forward as planned. "And what was
the result of this? The worst that we had expected. The Germans surrounded our
army concentrations and consequently we lost hundreds of thousands of our
soldiers."[^12_6]

Hitler believed himself to be a military genius, and many military men were
greatly impressed with his early successes in directing military operations.
Hitler was *a* master of the politics of collectivism, as already has been
noted, and so long as he could conduct war in a similar manner as his political
moves, i.e., by surprise, by audacity, by swiftness, and by doing the
unexpected, he was a master strategist. However, once his forces were on the
defensive these tactics were of little use. Armies that are overpowered need to
withdraw, to cut their losses, maintain discipline, shorten their lines, and
take up superior positions. Time and again Hitler refused to authorize tactical
withdrawals, insisting that his units stand their ground or seize the
initiative, only to have them overwhelmed or retreat in disarray. Although there
is no satisfactory way to calculate such things, it is probable that the number
of deaths attributed to Stalin and Hitler should be increased by several
millions on account of their military blunders.

My main purpose here is neither to prove that Hitler and Stalin were dictators
nor that dictatorship can have horrifying unwanted consequences. Those are
points, of course, that are well taken, but they are generally, though not
universally, accepted. The point is rather that collectivism entails
dictatorship, entails the concentration of power in the hands of a single man,
and that the ills that follow are a consequence of collectivism.

In short, dictatorship as we have come to know it in the twentieth century is an
effect, not a cause. It is the necessary effect of the idea which has the world
in its grip. If all effort is to be concerted to achieve an end, any end, that
effort must be directed by a single man, else it will be dispersed due to the
diversity of men. Communism was the cause of Stalin's dictatorship. Nazism was
the cause of Hitler's dictatorship, even though it is conceivable that Hitler
contrived the Nazi ideology in order to become dictator. Rule by one is the norm
for the control and direction of all human organizations; rule by one is
transformed into personal dictatorship by collectivism.

## Atonement

The key to understanding the effects produced by socialist or collectivist
ideologies is their thrust to *concert* all efforts. These ideologies proclaim
that man is not free and creative because he is not at one with those around
him. He is not at one because there are those in his midst who have aims and
purposes at odds with him. This external conflict internalizes itself in the
individual as the drive to pursue his own self-interest, which, in turn, tends
to set every man against every other man. Socialist ideologies propose a
historical explanation for this condition. Marxists hold that the condition is a
product of the class struggle, a struggle resulting from the control of the
means of production of goods and services by some dominant class. In this latest
age, capitalists constitute that dominant class, and they are the disrupters of
the harmony and productivity of man. According to Nazi ideology, the historical
conflict is basically racial. According to Hitler, what stood in the way of
unity, harmony-at oneness-, and freedom of the German or Nordic peoples was the
presence in their midst of disruptive races, or, more specifically, the Jews.

What collectivist ideologies attempt to achieve, then, is atonement. (This is
the religious word "atonement," which socialists do not employ, but which
captures the overtones of their meaning. The unity or at-one-ment they profess
to seek, of course, is not with God but within society, which is the deepest
reason for referring to them as socialists.) The basic device for achieving an
at-one-ment within society is what is called by psychologists "projection." That
is, they project upon some other group or class or race the blame for the ills
or discontents that beset them. This is also known as "scapegoating." The
Marxists blame the disruption upon the "exploiting classes," upon capitalists,
imperialists, or whatever. The industrial worker is invited to project the blame
for his condition upon the owners of factory and mine. The peasant is to lay the
blame for his deprivation upon the landlord. Hitler, of course, projected the
blame for the disharmony and disruption of the German people on the Jews.

## Enemies to Demolish

Both Nazi and Marxist ideologues sometimes presented their cases very
simplistically. To the Marxists, it would only be necessary for the proletariat
to seize the means of production from the capitalists, and everything would be
set right. To the Nazis, it would only be necessary to suppress and drive out
the Jews, and the Germans would be freed from the incubus afflicting them. But,
of course, it *was* never that simple. In both ideologies, society was supposed
to be deeply infected; the sources of the disintegration of the individual and
society lay deep.

To the Marxists, capitalist ideology was deeply imbedded in the whole cultural
framework. This condition was described *as* the prevalence of bourgeois
culture. Due to this prevalence, the pursuit of self-interest which occasioned
the disharmony and produced the disruption in society had penetrated the arts,
literature, the family, all social institutions, and was given the color of
divine sanction by religion. Only the most advanced of an elite could be free
from its sway at the outset.

The Jewish infection, as Hitler was given to calling it, was believed by the
Nazis to have burrowed deeply into German culture, and into that of other
peoples as well. There were, of course, many prominent Jews in literature, in
music, in the other arts, and particularly in the field of publishing. The great
carrier of the "Jewish infection," Hitler claimed, was international Marxism.
But it takes no great insight to perceive that there was an even more pervasive
source of "Jewish infection" in Germany, namely, the Christian churches. The
roots of Christianity in Judaism, the fact that Jesus was born a Jew, were facts
that Hitler might ignore publicly but which did not go away by being ignored.
Some of the Nazis were as outspokenly anti-Christian as they dared to be.
Heinrich Himmler and Martin Bormann were two of the more prominent. Speer says
that Bormann carried on a continual verbal campaign against the churches with
Hitler. Hitler's standard reply was, "Once I have settled my other problems...
I'll have my reckoning with the church. I'll have it reeling on the
ropes."[^12_7]

*This article is continued in Part 2: Nazi-Soviet Parallels, Part 2.*

# World in the Grip of an Idea: 12. Nazi-Soviet Parallels, Part 2

Thursday, December 1, 1977

*Continued from Part 1. (Nazi-Soviet Parallels, Part 1)*

## Rooting Out Infections

A part of the repression of Nazi and Soviet regimes was aimed at the
"scapegoats," those on whom the blame for conditions was projected. Another part
was aimed at rooting out and destroying any "infections" from these elements.
The remainder of the repression, so far as it was ideological in origin, was
aimed at concerting all efforts, i.e., producing action in conformity with the
regime. Vladimir Yurasov, a defector from the Soviet Union, has summed up the
impact of all this in a fictionalized account of his experiences. The following
quotations in the speech of one of his characters are supposed to be from
General Serov, a real life head of military security:

… We cannot permit our people to live as they please! Do you understand? People
it seems have themselves too much in mind! But government deems that you should
deny your own self, become the same sort of fanatic or else-off to a labor camp!
Off to become a slave! Katia, *do you understand?*[^12_8]

Hitler described the Nazi idea this way: "The underlying idea is to do away with
egoism and to lead people into the collective egoism which is the
nation."[^12_9] Or again, "It is essential that the individual should slowly
come to realize that his own ego is unimportant when compared with the existence
of the whole people..."[^12_10] He would, he declared, stamp "the Nazi
*Weltanschauung* [world outlook] on the German people." For, "it is only the
harshest principles and an iron resolution which can unite the nation into a
single body..."[^12_11]

## Curbing Individuality

In both the Nazi and Soviet systems, then, the individual could be of no
importance. Only as he joined his efforts to those of the mass would they be of
consequence. It follows that individual liberty would be dependent upon the will
of the regime, that individual rights could hardly exist, that freedom of choice
would be severely circumscribed, and that private property could exist in name
only. So it is in the Soviet Union; so it was in Nazi Germany.

Neither freedom of speech, nor freedom of press, nor freedom of association
could be tolerated. In the Soviet Union, individuals have been sentenced to
years of servitude in forced labor camps for failing to report some
anti-Communist remark or joke that they have overheard. A priest was sentenced
to death in Nazi Germany for making an anti-Nazi joke in front of an electrician
who was working at his rectory.[^12_12] Joseph Goebbels, Propaganda Minister for
the Nazis, was in charge of the news, among other things. He determined what
should be reported and how it should be told. Daily press directives went out
from the Propaganda Ministry to editors all over the country, directives which
covered in minute detail how everything should be handled.[^12_13] There are, of
course, no private newspapers or television or radio stations in the Soviet
Union; in consequence, all news is determined by political and ideological
considerations. Crashes of Soviet airplanes are not reported, for instance, and
the names of those killed are never published. There is good reason for this
latter practice; no record is kept of passengers on airlines. So much for the
individual!

Nazis held ceremonial book burnings at universities and other places. Not only
were the works of Jews consigned to the flames but also many works of Gentiles
that were considered dangerous. In general, modern art and modern music were
proscribed in Germany. In the Soviet Union, all access to foreign materials is
limited or restricted, and all publishing houses are government controlled. Much
of the same sort of art and music that was prohibited in Nazi Germany is kept
from view by the Communists. Both Communists and Nazis had ideological
predilections toward "folk art," but in practice favored the classics. Freedom
of association may well be the most valuable of all freedoms. Certainly, without
it all other freedoms are sterile and barren. It is the means by which voluntary
cooperation takes place, by which men work together in groups to effect their
ends, whether social, religious, charitable, business, or whatever. And, freedom
of association is anathema to collectivism. Since all activity must be
concerted, any voluntary association is suspect, or worse. It is a potential
conspiracy against the state; hence, it must be broken up.

## Restrictions on Association

Association with an "enemy of the people" has long been proscribed in the Soviet
Union. Penalties for it range from a few years in a camp to death. But it is not
possible ordinarily to know who is an "enemy of the people" until he has been
convicted or sentenced. Thus, all associations are fraught with danger, even
with members of one's own family, for punishment ordinarily is retroactive for
association with an "enemy of the people." There are, of course, many
associations in the Soviet Union, but membership in them is hardly voluntary,
and they are not free. There are associations of writers, of artists, of
workers, of farmers, of clergymen, and so on. It is usually necessary to belong
to the "association" in order to engage in the activity involved-to belong to
the association of writers in order to get published, for example-, but the
association is under the direction and control of the state. It is an instrument
of state, not of its members.

The restrictions on association were never as thorough and complete in Nazi
Germany as in the Soviet Union, but it hardly could be said that the Germans had
freedom of association. Only one political party was permitted so that there was
no choice of political association. Only one labor union was allowed, and it was
government controlled. In effect, there could be no private business
associations or private farmer organizations. The government penetrated and
controlled these. A dissident association of clergymen ended with many of its
members in prisons and concentration camps.

## Especially, the Jews

The most strenuous restrictions on association were between other Germans and
Jews. (Jews generally have insisted, and rightly, that they were Germans too.)
The most rigorous restrictions were applied to marital and sexual relations
between Gentiles and Jews, but they extended to other areas as well. Except for
the aged, "German" women were not permitted to work in Jewish households.
"Jewish pupils were excluded from the state-school system, and all Jews were
debarred from public swimming-pools, sports grounds and parks.... A typical
scene took place at a Berlin greengrocer's when a four-year old Jewish girl
begged her mother for some cherries; when told that fruit was excluded from the
Jewish ration she ran out of the shop crying."[^12_14] It was precarious, of course, to
associate with a Marxist, a pacifist, or anyone who might be anti-Hitler or
anti-Nazi.

Private property is the necessary condition of individual rights. Without it,
there is no place to stand against the state, and there are no means with which
to protect oneself. It is well known that Russian Communists made a root and
branch assault on private property. Such remnants of it as remain in the Soviet
Union are privileges granted by the state, not rights belonging to the
individual. The attack upon property was neither so direct nor so drastic in
Nazi Germany as in the Soviet Union. The major exception was the property of
Jews, much of which was confiscated. Indeed, the Nazi approach to property
differed from that of revolutionary socialism. It was more nearly that of
gradualist or evolutionary socialism. Hitler had declared in the middle of 1933
that henceforth he intended to follow an evolutionary road. This was generally
so where private property was concerned.

## Empty Forms of Property

Land titles and deeds generally were left undisturbed. Individual and family
holdings were likely to remain technically in the same hands as before.
"Technically" is the key word here, however, for property was treated as an
adjunct of the state, something to be used and disposed of in the interest of
the nation. The substance of private property was drained away while the form
was left more or less intact. For example, from 1937 onward shareholders could
no longer participate in determination of corporate policy. Many Nazis were
placed on boards of directors, and control of companies was determined by a
combination of managers, Nazi Party officials, and government policy. There was
a movement toward a return to primogeniture and entail for rural property, which
divested the owner of the power to dispose of the property. Agriculture was
controlled by what was called the Food Estate. Some of its activities are
described in the following:

> The Food Estate maintained a dossier on each farm, in which it entered monthly
> reports on the state of crops and livestock, labour force and wages, delivery
> obligations and actual delivery data. Intent on its self-sufficiency drive,
> the regime also partly coerced and partly coaxed farmers into reducing the
> area under such crops as wheat, rye and temporarily-hops in favour of beet,
> flax, rape and sunflowers.[^12_15]

Coercion apparently extended also to farm animals, for the Food Estate
prescribed that each hen should lay at least 65 eggs per year. It is unlikely,
however, that Nazi Gauleiters came to the farms personally to wring the necks of
non-conformist hens.

In brief, the Nazis controlled, or attempted to, the means of production and
distribution of goods and services. All producers belonged to some sort of
collective, one devised for the particular undertaking. These collectives, in
turn, were interpenetrated and dominated by the government. Prices and wages
were controlled; production quotas were set; and the unproductive were weeded
out. Licensing for trades and crafts controlled the opening of new businesses.
The socialist plank of the Nazi program was honored; even if it was not in the
way prescribed by Marxists.

## Propaganda Measures

Repressive measures were not the only means used by Nazis or Soviet Communists
to draw people into the collective effort. Both regimes sought to concert all
efforts by "positive" measures. There were parallels here, too. Communists
employ propaganda on a massive scale. Indeed, the language, the literature, the
arts, and even the architecture is permeated with propaganda. Communists have
long opposed the idea of "art for art's sake." The practical meaning of this is
that art exists for ideological, political, and propagandic reasons. They are
equally opposed to food for food's sake, tractors for tractors' sake, clothing
for clothing's sake, sports for sports' sake, and so on. Everything that is
produced and brought into being is for the glorification of communism:
production is for the statistics of production (gross national product, as we
would say); victories of Soviet athletes show the superiority of communism;
tractors demonstrate the progress of Russia under communism. Foreign newsmen are
apt to be accused of spying when they take pictures in the Soviet Union. Their
offense, one suspects, is that they may get such pictures published without the
propaganda gloss which is necessary to "understanding" them.

The Nazis used propaganda as vigorously and extensively as any regime ever has.
Joseph Goebbels undertook to see that every medium of expression was used to
glorify the Aryan race, the German people, the Nazis, and Hitler. Nazis probably
were much more successful in drawing the people into and making them a part of
the propaganda than communists have been. German might became visible by way of
goose-stepping soldiers marching through the streets or massing at some rally.
But millions of Germans who were not in the army wore uniforms. Eventually,
nearly all children belonged to the Hitler Youth between the ages of 10 and 18.
There was the SA and the elite corps of SS in their uniforms. The ideal German,
German history, and German exploits were depicted in song, in story, in film, on
canvas and, if it could be done, in architecture. The Third Reich was supposed
to last for a thousand years, a millennium, according to Nazi propaganda, and
its enduring foundation was being laid by Hitler.

## Commitment to Collectivism

There are too many parallels between the Nazis and Soviet Communists to be
covered here. They parallel one another in such things as the Hitler Youth and
Komsomol or Young Communists. Both attempted to use the schools for imbuing the
young with their ideas. Both Nazi and Soviet leaders were gangster-like in their
operations. Both regimes relied on terror to consolidate and maintain their
power. The list could be made longer, but surely the point emerges. The matter
has been aptly summed up by Leopold Tyrmand in the opening paragraph of a
chapter on "Communism and Nazism: a short comparative study":

> Ruminating on this topic is generally regarded as vulgar, as something too
> unbecoming to be done. But why? No one really knows for sure. It is the terror
> of a convention. Too many people who later became respectable declared
> themselves Communists at some time in their lives. Those, however, who
> survived both Nazism and communism, without consenting to participate in
> either, are not versed in such subtleties. In Eastern Europe there are
> millions of such people, and the rule consecrated by intellectuals that
> communism and Hitlerism are *not* the same does not hold water with them.
> Because if one thinks about it unsqueamishly, pitilessly, and to the end, it
> is all too easy to establish their grisly similarity.[^12_16]

The "grisly similarity" is a result of *a* similar cause: the commitment of both
regimes to collectivism. The effort to produce human felicity in both cases
produced widespread torment. Even grisly regimes, perhaps grisly regimes
particularly, give rise to their own wry humor. Hitler was hardly a laughing
matter to Jews, but their sense of humor, this last resort of the human spirit,
did not entirely desert them. Here is a Jewish joke from Nazi Germany which
might just as well have come from Soviet Russia:

Meeting the worried and abstracted Goldstein, Kohn tells him that Davidsohn has
died. Goldstein shrugs his shoulders. "Well, if he got a chance to better
himself. . ."[^12_17]

[^12_1]: Albert Speer, *Inside the Third Reich,* trans. by Richard and Clara
  Winston (New York: Avon Books, 1970), p. 181.

[^12_2]: Nikita Khrushchev, *Khrushchev Remembers,* trans. and ed. by Strobe
  Talbott (New York: Bantam, 1970), p. 614.

[^12_3]:  p. 279.

[^12_4]: Speer, *op. cit., p.* 137.

[^12_5]: Khrushchev, *op. cit.,* pp. 320-21.

[^12_6]: *Ibid.,* p. 648.

[^12_7]: Speer, *op. cit.,* p. 175.

[^12_8]: Vladimir Yurasov, *Parallax,* trans. by Tatiana Balkoff Drowne (New
  York: W. W. Norton, 1966), p. 124.

[^12_9]: Alan Bullock, *Hitler, A Study in Tyranny* (New York: Harper &amp; Row,
  1962 rev. ed.), p. 402.

[^12_10]: p. 401.

[^12_11]: *Ibid.,* p. 405.

[^12_12]: Richard Grunberger, *The 12-Year Reich* (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
  Winston, 1971), p. 331.

[^12_13]: *See ibid., p.* 395.

[^12_14]: *Ibid.,* pp. 456, 461.

[^12_15]: *Ibid.,* 163.

[^12_16]: Leopold Tyrmand, *The Rosa Luxemburg Contraceptives Cooperative* (New
  York: Macmillan, 1972), p. 165.

[^12_17]: Grunberger, *op. cit.,* p. 340.

