# World in the Grip of an Idea: 14. World War II: The Bitter Fruit of Ideology

[Wednesday, February 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/february-1978/)

In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between Ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the Ideas and practices around the world.

The idea that has the world in its grip is at its roots a simple, even a
simplistic, idea. It is the notion that what ails us is the pursuit of
self-interest by individuals, a pursuit which leads to the dispersal of
energies, diversity, and competition, even conflict. The cure for this, so the
proponents of the idea claim, is to forge a social unity in which all efforts
will be concerted toward the realization of common goals. Government is the
means they employ toward this end, and the method is to remove the legal,
social, and cultural props which enable the individual to act in his own
interest; removal of those props makes it necessary for him to act for common
goals. Revolutionaries propose to bring this about by drastic and forceful
measures. This articulation of the idea is commonly called revolutionary
socialism.

World War II was a titanic struggle between opposing varieties of revolutionary
socialism, between Soviet Communism and Nazi Germany. It was a struggle for
dominance over Europe, particularly central and eastern Europe (and on the
Japanese side for the dominance of Asia and the Pacific). Hitler's variety of
socialism was the more virulent of the two. Soviet Communism is inclined toward
subversion, conspiracy, and the plodding pace of a projected historical
development. Nazism was the vision of a single man, something to be realized in
his lifetime. Hitler was the apotheosis of National Socialism, its
personification and deification. Communism is supposed to be victorious in the
world by the process of historical determinism. National Socialism's victory was
supposed to be the destiny of a single man—and the German people.

## No Time for Subtleties

Hitler grasped the rudiments of the idea that has the world in its grip; the
subtleties eluded him, and he had no time for them. His socialism came to him by
way of osmosis, something filtered into him from the intellectual climate of the
time. He tacked his prejudices on the rudimentary idea, and the result was
National Socialism. Whatever of intellectual gloss it had came from such fringe
German thinkers as Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Oswald Spengler, Alfred
Rosenberg, Karl Haushofer, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Richard Wagner. It should be
noted that these were not socialist thinkers, as such, and most of those with a
bent toward socialist ideology who entered the Nazi movement were either
sloughed off or played minor roles in the government. Hitler's socialism was not
Marxian socialism or Revisionist socialism or any other of the generally
accepted varieties. It was Hitlerian socialism, i.e., National Socialism—Nazism.
It was revolutionary, militant, anti-communist, racist, nationalist, and
martial.

Left to his own devices, it is doubtful that Stalin would have gone to war
against Nazi Germany. During their sixty-year span, Soviet Communists have gone
to war against a major power only once voluntarily, and that was against Japan
when it was apparent that the days of the Japanese Empire were already numbered.
Soviet leaders have preferred to let "you and them" fight rather than to become
embroiled in a major war. Communism is bent toward warfare, but it is civil war,
not foreign wars in the usual sense. In the first place, communists make a kind
of war against the people over whom they rule. In the second place, they foment
strife in other countries which can break out as civil wars. The indications are
that the leaders of the Soviet Union like very long odds in their favor when
they go to war. The odds, if any, were on the side of Gemany in 1941.

By contrast, Hitler sought war rather than avoided it, and major powers were the
only ones really worthy of his steel, although he was quite willing to crush any
small power standing in his path. Moreover, Hitler frequently flouted world
opinion and flaunted his obnoxious racial ideas before the world. His contempt
for other peoples was hardly held in check. Yet, there were times when Hitler
apparently longed to be not just the conqueror but the hero of the people of the
world. Perhaps, he longed to be loved, as most men do, but was led by what he
conceived to be his mission to do unlovely things. There is a vast amount of
evidence to the effect that he had great personal magnetism and unusual
leadership abilities. Time and again generals came to his headquarters
discouraged and depressed, ready to give up, only to go forth from their session
with Hitler inspired with a new zeal to fight on. It was not just sycophancy
that led those around him to speak of his powers.

## To Gain the World

Anti-communism was his chosen route to world veneration. If the world would only
see him as he wished to be seen it would see him as its savior from the menace
of communism, or so he hoped. His assault upon Russia was to be a crusade
against everything he hated: Bolshevism, international socialism, the Slays, and
the seat of what he conceived to be the Jewish conspiracy. In this struggle, he
believed the rest of the world would join him if it only once understood what he
was doing. Much of the world saw all too clearly what Hitler was doing in
Europe, however, to hear what he was saying about Bolshevism. In any case, all
that Hitler offered was a Germanic socialism to replace the "international"
variety of communism.

World War II was, according to most savants, a total war. It was war waged not
only between military forces but against civilians. It was a war in which vast
resources on all sides were mustered behind the war effort. It was waged by
propaganda, in battle, on land, on sea, in the air, and, above all, against
cities. It was a war of conquest by the Axis powers and one which could only be
ended by unconditional surrender, the Allies proclaimed. It derived its
character from totalitarian ideologies and entailed the clash of socialist
titans. How socialism gave the war its character needs now to be made clear.

Socialism attacks the foundations of civility at many different levels.
Socialist analysis, whether Marxian, Bernsteinian. Hitlerian, or whatever, deals
with society, and hence the people who compose it, as it were a machine. It
speaks of classes or races, of industry and agriculture, of labor, of the
proletariat, of the bourgeoisie, of nations, and so forth as if these were
things mechanical in nature. It pits class against class, race against race,
nation against nation, and group against group for dominance and control. It
dehumanizes, reducing man to that accidental portion of himself by which he may
be classified in some mechanical fashion. It decivilizes. (Statistics applied to
man is the ultimate mental act of dehumanization, for it reduces man to a
number. And it is hardly an accident that the use of statistics has grown with
the spread of socialism, for they are a prime means of manipulation and
directing change. Statistics ought to be used in public with the same restraint
as profanity, for they profane man by reducing him to a virtual nullity.)

Another way that socialism attacks the foundations of civility is to weaken or
destroy the inherited culture. Culture is society's way both of liberating and
restraining man. Socialism, whether of the communist or Nazi variety, proceeds
by undermining the received religion, morality, education, literature, and
customs and either destroying or controlling and redirecting them for its
purposes. The removal of civilized restraints was a major contributor to the
ferocity, the extent, and-the atrocities of World War II. But it may be well to
examine in some more depth the assault of socialism on the foundations of
civility at a rudimentary level. The most basic and direct attack of socialism
is upon private property. (That the Nazis gave other ideological grounds for
their confiscation and control of private property did not alter the primacy of
their assault on property.) This set the stage for much else that followed,
including the atrocities of World War II and after.

## A Small Atrocity

A simple story may help illustrate the point. This is the story of a small
atrocity, an atrocity so insignificant beside the monstrous ones of World War II
that it would not appear to be worthwhile to tell it. Yet it is a poignant story
and, if I mistake not, one pregnant with meaning. It happened in a village not
far from Bonn, Germany on a raw overcast morning in March of 1945. The scene was
the kitchen of a small house. In one corner of the room sat an old German
couple, huddled in their winter clothes against the chill weather. In the center
stood a couple of American soldiers, cooks for a mortar platoon of a heavy
weapons company. I stood aside, watching. One of the soldiers was picking up
china, piece by piece, dropping it to the floor and breaking it. The old couple
cringed and mumbled to one another. The soldier silenced them with a menacing
look and turned to us to say, "I've been in this war since North Africa, and the
Germans are to blame." He proceeded to smash the rest of the china. It may not
have been china that would have brought a great price in the market, but it was
such as they had, and by the looks of them they could not easily replace the
broken pieces. It was, as I said, only a small atrocity.

Whatever moved him to this destructive act, this callous soldier had grasped,
however unwittingly, what lay at the root of the cause of World War II and was
re-enacting it. I viewed his act at the time with a mixture of horror and
disgust, but I was helpless to do anything about it, for I had no authority and
was there only temporarily awaiting transportation to my platoon. What hurt me,
of course, was his wanton disrespect for property, someone else's property at
that!

I had been brought up to respect property, to use it with care, and to value it:
mine, the family's, and that belonging to others. It was a lesson drilled into
me as a child and reinforced on at least one occasion which I recall by a rare
whipping from my father. One of my brothers and I had been throwing pieces of
baked potatoes at one another. There were several violations going on, but I
suspect that the most serious was the misuse of baked potatoes. They were
intended to be eaten, not as missiles in fraternal conflict. I was taught
respect for much else besides, but I now understood that under girding and
buttressing the rest was respect for property.

## Disrespect for Property

Socialism inculcates disrespect for property, not in the abstract, perhaps, but
in the concrete. Socialists hold real property owners in contempt and
particularly owners of productive equipment. When they are in power they
confiscate property or take effective control over it. In theory, this might do
no harm to the property, but in fact it is quite otherwise. One of the Catholic
popes is supposed to have said something to the effect that property ownership
may not be good for the individual but it is very good for the property.
Whatever the merits of the first part of his proposition, the insight in the
second part is sound: No better way has ever been found to have property cared
for, protected, and used properly than private ownership of it. Property held in
common is frequently abused and neglected, being protected mainly by such habits
as have been formed in caring for private property. State-owned property can
attract little more respect than the state that owns it; not much, one gathers,
as the state becomes bloated with the tasks it takes on and poorly performs.

There is an essential nexus between property and man. It is the means of his
livelihood, the base of his production, the goods with which he trades, and the
foundation of his independence. Individual life depends upon it, and social life
withers without it. Socialism breaks this connection between man and property.
Socialists fulminate against property and the propertied, describe them as
capitalists or "finance capitalists," as exploiters, and, by implication, hold
property in contempt.

Property is a vital extension of the man who owns it. It is his lifeline to and
from the world about him, a buffer from the outside and one of his most
effective means of reaching out to others. In socialist theory, man's individual
ownership and control over property is only an incident in his historical
development. Property is, therefore, separable from the individual who owns it.
So it is, of course, but if it is done against his will the effects are
devastating. A man's heart is separable from the rest of his body, but if it is
ripped out he must surely die. Man does not necessarily die when his property is
taken away, though he may; but he is bereft of his main protection from, and
means of contributing to, those about him.

My central concern here, however, is with the extended impact of the loss of
respect for property and a general assault upon it. There is no way to launch an
assault upon a man's property without at the same time assaulting him. To put it
another way, lack of respect for property is part and parcel of lack of respect
for the owner of it. Every property owner surely feels this; it tends to be one
of his reasons for going to the defense of his property.

## A Protective Shield

There is a shield, so to speak, which protects each of us from violation by
others. Property is the outworks of the shield. It is the boundary line of our
real property, the walls of our house, the enclosure of our vehicles, the door
to our rooms, and the clothes that we wear. The inner-works of the shield are
the awe in which we hold life and the respect for the individual and what is
his. Loss of respect for property precedes or accompanies the destruction of the
outworks of the shield. Respect for the individual and the awe with which life
is held crumble as the outworks are breached. Of course, the assault upon
religion, morality, and the received culture accompanies the assault upon
property in socialist lands. This assault cuts away the respect for property,
for the individual, and for life, too.

The ferocity and brutality of World War II, then, was a consequence of the
erosion of respect for property, for the individual, and for life. It frequently
occurred in that order, too. The trespass, confiscation, and alienation of
control over property from the owner frequently preceded the assault upon the
individual and the callous taking of lives. The Jews in Germany had generally
lost the bulk of their property or control over it long before they were shipped
to such places as Auschwitz to be exterminated. First, they lost control over
department stores, publishing houses, and other types of businesses. Then they
were denied employment in many areas. Only after they had lost whatever means
they had once possessed for protecting themselves were they subjected to the
"final solution." Totalitarianism proceeded in Germany by divesting the people
in general of the control of their property.

The serving up of Russian soldiers in vast numbers as cannon fodder had been
preceded by the confiscation of their property and increasing control over their
lives. The individual counts for nothing, Soviet propaganda had taught, and the
leaders demonstrated the validity of the thesis using men as if they were
nameless things in combat. A Russian detachment in retreat marched by the place
where a Russian soldier was lying dead. Someone asked if they were not going to
get his identification. "For what purpose?" asked the officer in charge. "So
that you can notify his family," was the reply. "Oh, that's not necessary," the
officer said, "when they don't hear from him after awhile they'll realize he is
dead." Tens of thousands of German prisoners disappeared into the Soviet Union,
never to be heard from again. The government of the Soviet Union proposed to
plan every aspect of the economy for a huge empire, yet could not be bothered to
perform the most basic task of government of notifying the next-of-kin of those
who died in its charge.

## First Trespass, then Death

Though we may not ordinarily think of it that way, much of the maiming and
killing of war could not occur until property had been trespassed. This was
certainly true for World War II. The millions of civilians that were wounded and
killed by bombings and other sorts of bombardments were usually initially the
victims of trespass first. Those under shelter were usually secure until the
building around them had been struck, set fire, or demolished by shells or
bombs.

Perhaps it can be visualized this way. One of my most vivid images from World
War II is of rooms nakedly exposed to onlookers when the outer walls had been
blasted away by bombs or shells. It sticks in my mind that I gazed upward once,
though it may have occurred any number of times, into a delicately-appointed
bedroom indecently exposed for all to see. The three walls left standing were
pink, the bed had one leg hanging over that portion of the floor that had been
bombed away, and there was a dresser and table or stool. It was a room such as
might have been lived in by a young girl. The trespass in such cases, and the
violation of civilized rules and decorum, was virtually simultaneous with the
maiming and killing.

This is not a brief against war as such. It is intended, however, to call
attention to those ideologies which hold property, and hence life, in contempt,
and by so doing turn war into a catastrophically destructive affair.

The boundaries of nations, too, serve as a shield protecting the lives and
property of people within them. The trespass of these boundaries is, by
extension, a trespass upon property. National boundaries were violated at will
during World War II. Indeed, this was frequently done with callous disregard for
the rules of relations among nations: without warning, without any declaration
of war, and without restraint. German armies invaded Poland, Norway, Denmark,
the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxemburg, and other lands in this fashion. Nor did
the Soviet Union, Japan, and Italy observe civilized rules for beginning wars
against nations. In consequence of such violations millions of persons were
carted off to serve one or another nation as slave laborers for their war
machines. The condition, once again, was the trespass of property.

## The Defeat of Nazism

One variety of socialism—Nazism or Fascism—went down to defeat at the end of
World War II. That portion of the ideology which was racist and militaristic was
as nearly discredited as such things ever are. Nazi Germany was thoroughly,
completely, and ignominiously defeated. By the first of May, 1945, Allied armies
had swept back the once proud German armies onto German soil and that was
virtually all occupied. Hitler and his entourage were in an underground bunker
in Berlin, a city shattered and devastated by repeated and prolonged bombings
and now under siege by Soviet artillery. The roads out of the city were closed
and no regular airports were available. In desperation, Adolf Hitler and his
bride, Eva Braun Hitler, committed suicide. The SS detachment was hard put to
get together enough gasoline to burn their bodies. Much of Germany was in ruins,
and the power of the Nazis had evaporated. The rubble in the streets was the
remains of Hitler's ambitious plans for architecturally redesigning such cities
as Berlin.

The reasons for the defeat need some amplification. At its height, the Nazi
empire had encompassed most of continental Europe from the Urals to the Atlantic
with outposts in North Africa. That portion not occupied was under governments
generally friendly to Germany if neutral (Spain, Sweden, Vichy France, etc.) or
allied with the Axis (Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania, etc.) excepting mainly the
Soviet Union. What had been European civilization save the British Isles, was
under German sway. Never before in history had continental Europe been so near
to being under a single power.

Hitler had under his control many of the most highly developed lands in the
world, a goodly portion of the most skilled peoples in the world, and experts of
unsurpassed ability. German chemists were among the best in the world. (They
probably could have made ersatz water if hydrogen and oxygen had been in short
supply.) Only oil, among major natural resources, was not generally available in
sufficient quantity to fuel his war machine. Even so, the potential was there
for a Fortress Europe which would have been impervious to all outside power. Why
that did not happen needs some explanation.

There were undoubtedly many contributing factors to the German defeat.
Historical post mortems have already explored them, and they will not occupy our
attention here. But the crucial fact is that Hitler never mustered most of the
might of Europe behind him. Most of the peoples never identified with the Nazi
cause. Such cooperation as they generally contributed to it was grudging at best
and something less than half-hearted as a rule. Indeed, Hitler's only
significant effort to get the willing support of the peoples of Europe was to
picture his as an anti-Communist crusade. That was obviously a flawed position,
however. He might have been able to overcome the implications of the Nazi-Soviet
pact but not the fact that he was at war with Britain and the United States,
among many other non-communist nations. Moreover, his own cruel regime was
hardly an improvement over Soviet Communism.

## Submission Sought

In the main, though, the Nazis did not even seek the willing aid of many of the
peoples of Europe. On the contrary, the peoples were held in contempt, and the
Nazis sought only to beat them into submission. This was in keeping with the
ideology. Nazism was national German socialism, and all who were not
predominantly Nordic or German were believed to be inferior peoples. The cruel
treatment by the SS of the peoples in eastern Europe made the Nazis as feared
and hated as the Communists had ever been.

Hitler refused on a number of occasions the importunings of his officers to be
permitted to recruit an army from the Russian prisoners of war. Armies of other
nations that fought with Germans enjoyed only a kind of honorary status as
equals. Hitler generally held the Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgarian soldiers in
contempt as inferior to the Germans. Not surprisingly, many of the Italian
officers were eager to get out of the war, and the armies from central Europe
were at best fair weather friends.

In short, the Nazis failed to muster the support of Europe because of their
ideology. Their national racism could only be repugnant to all others. It
appears that Hitler could only have mustered the willing support of Europe, if
at all, by abandoning his ideology. At any rate, he did not get it, and without
it his armies were overcome by forces from the outside even as they were
weakened by resistance from within Europe.

## Promises Unfulfilled

Hitler had promised to build a "folkish state." He had promised to augment the
power of the individual by merging it with the collective, to elevate the German
people by freeing them from their submission to the Treaty of Versailles. They
would become masters by identification with him as the symbol and embodiment of
themselves. There is no doubt, either, that many Germans felt the surge of power
as they heard or saw Hitler speak, as they massed to participate in the
performance of the Nazi rituals, as they looked on marching German soldiers and
won their first great victories. The might of the German collective was palpable
at the Nuremberg Party rallies, as hundreds of flags waved above, as
searchlights played upward in the skies, as thousands lifted their arms and
shouted "Sieg Heil" in unison. For a few years, many, perhaps most, of the
German people were caught up in the pomp, the pageantry, and the promises of a
collective beatitude.

If so, their exaltation was short-lived. Hitler did not build a "folkish state."
He built a state over which Nazi Gauleiters ruled and the "folk" were an
instrument of state to be used as their rulers decided. The subjection of other
peoples and the importation of forced labor may have hidden from Germans for a
time the fact of their own subjugation. Collectivism augmented the powers of the
rulers at the expense of those who were ruled. Much of the substance of Germany
went into building the instruments for and fighting a war. The more the people
built the less they had. However glorious the early victories, more and more of
the young men were required to go to war. As the casualty lists lengthened many
families came to know the ultimate cost of war. None could deny the curtailment
of their lives as they spent more and more of their time in bomb shelters to
escape the fury of the bombs. The Germans were not a master race, as Hitler had
told them, they were only a mastered people.

## Disillusionment

Just when individual Germans realized this there is no way of knowing for a
whole population. What we do know is that by the end of the war many Germans
were glad indeed to have done with Hitler and his obsessive vision. In the last
weeks of the war the armies of the Western Allies were often greeted by the
Germans as heroes. As American tanks, trucks, and jeeps drove through many towns
and cities people lined the sidewalks to wave and cheer. This would have been a
smart thing to do in any case, but it had the look of spontaneity about it. At
least at the moment of their arrival, the Western Allies were being treated as
liberators.

In the east, a different kind of story was taking place. Germans, and others,
were fleeing by the hundreds of thousands before the advance of the Red Army.
Taking whatever they could with them, they fled toward the west seeking refuge
from an army bent on plundering and pillaging and destroying what it would.
Sometimes before, but certainly as soon as they could lay down their arms,
German troops too sought to make their way west to surrender to the Western
Allies. For several days after the end of the fighting, the relics of the German
armies poured through the lines of the Western Allies making their way to places
of internment. Men clung to the sides of whatever vehicle they could find that
would enable them to evade the clutches of the Red Army.

The defeat of the Axis in World War II did not significantly loosen the grip of
the idea that has the world in thrall, not for long anyway. True, the hold of
the Nazi variety of revolutionary socialism was struck off from western Europe,
but in central Europe the grip of revolutionary socialism, communism, was
established and tightened.

## Tyrannizing Poland

World War II had broken out in the wake of the German invasion of Poland. The
British and French governments had declared war on Germany in an attempt to
preserve the territorial integrity of Poland. When Hitler heard just before the
end of the war that a Soviet sponsored puppet government was being set up in
Poland he remarked the irony of it all. The British and French had gone to war
against him to save Poland, and now the Poles were being turned over to Soviet
tyranny. Indeed, any who would ponder the meaning of World War II, and the
impact of the idea that has the world in its grip, could do no better than begin
with Poland.

Poland has for several centuries been a bending and bent buffer between Russia
and western Europe. Time and again Poland has been the scene, or a part of it,
of the clashes between European powers and the butt of the treaties by which
they ended their conflicts. If ever a people deserved the compassion of men of
good will it must surely be the unfortunate Poles. Shortly after the Nazi
invasion of Poland the Soviet Union invaded from the east. The country was then
partitioned. Part of the country was then "Nazified" while the remainder was
being "Sovietized." The full fury of the SS was let loose in the Nazi "zone of
occupation." Poland's relatively large number of Jews were subjected to a pogrom
the like of which had never been seen before. Some of the most notorious Nazi
concentration camps were located in Poland, and the most vigorous extermination
was carried out there. Thousands of Jews died in an heroic stand against the
Nazis in the Warsaw Ghetto. The resisters were wiped out. Nor were Jews the only
victims: numerous Poles were dislocated to allow Germans to move in;
intellectuals and potential leaders got vicious attention from the SS.

## The Final Blows

As the Red Army advanced upon Warsaw the Polish resistance movement made a
determined effort to expel the Germans from the city. The Soviet armies halted
their advance and waited, apparently with malice aforethought, for the Germans
to wipe out the resistance. Roosevelt and Churchill appealed to Stalin at least
to allow British and Americans to airlift aid to the resisters, but their appeal
fell on deaf ears. On top of all this, thousands of Polish officers were shot
down in cold blood by Soviet forces at the Katyn Forest Massacre. All that
remained to be done to destroy Poland, it would seem, would be to sow the soil
with salt.

At any rate, the Soviet Union had an eviscerated Poland upon which to impose its
regime in 1945. The Soviet Union won the battle for central Europe, a main arena
in the contest of World War II. Communist regimes were subsequently imposed on
Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Albania, and Czechoslovakia. Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania had already lost all semblance of independence by being
incorporated into the Soviet Union. Part of Poland was incorporated into the
Soviet Union, part of Germany into Poland, and a communist regime established in
East Germany. Finland, too, lost territory to the Soviet Union.

Could it have been otherwise? Possibly. It was the style, in some circles
anyhow, after World War II to blame the fall of these countries to communism,
particularly that of Poland, on decisions made at the Yalta Conference of
Stalin, Roosevelt, and Churchill in early 1945. This is almost certainly a
misreading of history. The concessions made to Stalin at that conference were
largely in recognition of a fait accompli. The Red Army was already in or
marching into these countries. It was the presence of the Red Army that made it
possible to establish communist regimes generally.

## The Channel Crossing

The decision that sealed the fate of central and eastern Europe was almost
certainly made in 1943. It was the, decision to concentrate British and American
forces in England for a cross-channel invasion of France in 1944. It was the
decision for the English channel, so to speak, over the Adriatic and Aegean
Seas. The signal for the decision was given in December of 1943 when General
Eisenhower was appointed Supreme Commander of Allied Forces and moved from Italy
to England to prepare for the cross-channel invasion.

The Western Allies had already established a second front on continental Europe
in 1943. It was in Italy. Winston Churchill favored an assault on the "soft
under-belly of Europe," probably by way of the Adriatic. Militarily, the most
strategic target in all of Europe was the Rumanian oil fields. Once the oil
reaching German forces from Rumania and Hungary was cut off the days of the
German air force, tank divisions, and guided missiles would be numbered.
Politically, if the assault had been made in this way, much of southern and
central Europe might have been spared the occupation by the Red Army, and the
communist regimes. Instead, armed forces were concentrated in England, and in
the course of 1944 much of the military force was withdrawn from Italy to attack
westward in support of "Operation Overlord," the cross-channel invasion. The die
was cast many months before January of 1945.

## Post-War Communism

The spread of communism greatly accelerated in the wake of World War II. The
devastation of western Europe, the defeat and demilitarization of the Axis, left
power vacuums in much of the world. Wherever these occurred, communists saw them
as opportunities for expansion, either by way of joining coalition
governments—and occupying key positions in them until one party emerged
triumphant—or by fomenting civil wars. Not only had all of eastern, most of
central, and much of southern Europe fallen to communism, but with Japan
defeated and demilitarized, China became communist. As colonies were cut loose
from demoralized European countries, these became prime targets for the spread
of communism.

Communism was the only significant variety of revolutionary socialism in the
world after World War II. But communism is not the only variety of socialism in
the world. The idea that has the world in its grip has two faces: one is
revolutionary socialism; the other is evolutionary or gradualist socialism. It
is appropriate now to turn our attention to some examination of the working of
evolutionary socialism.

Next: 15. Sweden: The Matrix of Tradition and Gradualism.

