# World in the Grip of an Idea: 17. Sweden: Tightening the Screws

[Monday, May 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/may-1978/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the Impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

The loss of liberty is quite often subtle under evolutionary socialism. So also
is the loss of private property, or control over it. Under revolutionary
socialism only the purblind can fail to grasp the assault on property and the
onset of confinements of the population. The brutality of the attack is too
blunt and persistent to escape detection by any except those who resolutely will
to ignore it. By contrast, evolutionary socialism is intruded in such a way,
particularly under long-established parliamentary governments, that its
restraints, confinements, and erosions of the ground of liberty and property
are not so readily seen.

This is so in part because as the paternal state takes shape the focus is upon
benefits to be conferred rather than the price to be paid, both monetary and in
individual rights. There is a broader reason than this, however. It is that the
population, or a considerable portion of it, has been induced in advance of the
measures to accept certain underlying ideas, which make the intrusions appear
plausible and, perhaps, even inevitable.

One of the leading ideas is that of the desirability of distributive equality.
This is joined, of course, with the notion that all should work together in
collective harmony for the general good. When these ideas are linked to the
belief that government is the instrument by which this should be achieved the
way has been prepared for the introduction step by step of socialism.

The mechanism by which evolutionary socialism has been advanced is democracy.
Herein lies a paradox. As popular control over government has increased the
control by people over their own lives and affairs has declined. The paradox is
more apparent than real. That anyone should find it strange that people's
control over their lives declines as their participation in government increases
is the result of one of the most impressive selling jobs in all of history. In
the latter part of the nineteenth and in the twentieth century a tremendous
selling of democracy took place. Democracy was advanced as the great cure for
the ills of the world: if all peoples of the world would only adopt and practice
it, a worldwide prosperity, harmony, and peace would ensue. The massive
bloodletting which is now known as World War I was even described as a war to
make the world safe for democracy. Democracy would then, it was claimed, make
the world safe from wars.

## Coincidental Developments

These ideas gained plausibility from the fact that the development of democracy
occurred more or less simultaneously with other developments in the nineteenth
century. Such causal connection as the spread of democracy had with these other
developments was almost certainly accidental, but it did not appear so at the
time. The other nineteenth-century developments to which I allude were
constitutionalism, the establishment of individual liberty, the casting off of
feudal restrictions and the securing of private property, and the tendency to
negotiate agreements among nations rather than going to war to settle disputes.
Under these conditions trade expanded greatly, industries developed on an
unprecedented scale, population increased dramatically, and prosperity began to
become more general than ever before. It was under these conditions that Sweden
became an industrial and prosperous country, as noted earlier.

In retrospect, there appears to be little enough reason to connect these
developments with the spread of democracy. True, these developments occurred
first generally in countries which had representative or popular government,
that is, in Western Europe and America. And, there was undoubtedly a temporal
connection between representative government and the other developments. It was
this. The thrust to remove feudal and mercantile restrictions, to extend
liberty, and to restrain and limit government was generally expressed through
parliaments (legislatures, congresses, or whatever they might be called). This
was especially so of the elective branches of parliaments. As a result of this,
representative government began to be thought of as the champion of liberty.

The connection was temporal, as I have said. For the historical moment, as it
were, representative governments curtailed the power of kings and limited
government. The foundation of liberty was in constitutionalism which was itself
based on the natural law philosophy. The practical defense of liberty lay in the
separation of powers within government, a separation that would have the
tendency to restrain and limit government. Popular or representative government
can, at best, only reflect the prevailing mood among the populace, whatever that
may be. If that mood is libertarian, representative government may act upon it;
if it is totalitarian, representative government can do little more than be its
agent.

Even so, the thrust toward democracy got a tremendous boost from this temporal,
and temporary, connection. Champions of democracy pressed to have governments
more and more representative, to extend the franchise ever more broadly, and to
having all political decisions made on the basis of popular support. The
practical effect of this was to concentrate all power in the legislatures and to
negate the restraints upon government that rested upon a separation of powers.
In limited monarchies, such as Sweden and England, the monarch became more and
more limited, as did the hereditary nobility generally, and the representative
portions of parliaments triumphed.

## Democracy Is Mob Rule

The champions of democracy ignored the fundamental nature of democracy, a wealth
of historical experience with it, and a two thousand-year-old reasoned argument
against it. They made it an unquestioned good and a thing to be desired above
all else.

Whatever the merits of representative government, they do not extend to a
thoroughgoing democracy. It is an ancient insight that democracy is mob rule.
True, the mob-rule feature is moderated so long as the populace acts through
representatives; but representation is an inhibition on democracy, not a part of
its essential character. It was Greek democracy which sentenced Socrates to
exile or death. It was the mob which shouted to Pontius Pilate that Christ
should be crucified. It was the Roman mobs who turned their fickle support from
one conquering general to another that aided and abetted the horrors of the
Roman Empire. "Democratic" New England was the most intolerant locale in the
American colonies.

Democratic socialism has attempted to legitimize a modified mob rule. It has
done so by attributing to democracy virtues it does not possess and ignoring its
implicit vices. If democracy were not modified by representation and rules which
hold it in check it would be tyrannical. As it is, it is a compelled conformity,
a conformity which takes away individual liberty and intrudes upon private
property.

It is ironic that so many intellectuals should have championed social democracy
(or democratic socialism or collectivized democracy, whatever describes it
best). Modern intellectuals developed an early distaste for social conformity.
Ralph Waldo Emerson said that society is at war with every one of its members.
His meaning was that society is trying to settle us into a groove—make us
conform—that is contrary to what each of us as an individual would wish to be.
Society became and remains the villain for many intellectuals. It operates upon
the basis of tradition and bids those within its ranks, so to speak, to conform
or suffer rebuke, ostracism, or whatever punishments are within its power. And
conformity has been the *bete noire* of intellectuals.

Yet many of the same intellectuals who have condemned conformity to society have
been vigorous promoters of democracy, even democratic socialism. They have
promoted a compelled conformity by the use of government power over the
conformity induced by influence of society. They avoided the onus of this by
attributing goodness to democracy and claiming to identify society with
government by way of democracy. If conformity were the evil, it might be
supposed that compulsory conformity would be worse than elective conformity.

## Conformity to Their View

Actually, most intellectuals are no more opposed to conformity than are the
generality of people. Each of us harbors in his breast the desire to have others
conform to his will. What has troubled most intellectuals has not been
conformity but rather kinds of conformity to which they are opposed and over
which they have no control. Conformity to society, its norms and prescriptions,
has been, in their view, irrational and backward. By their lights, they would
substitute for conformity to tradition a conformity to reason, a reason that by
their conceit they are uniquely equipped to divulge. The idea that has the world
in its grip is a vision of just such a conformity.

The role of democracy in this needs also to be grasped. The theory of democracy
holds that democratic government would actuate the will of the people. If this
were the case, it is difficult to see how government action would be brought
under the control of intellectuals. What is more likely, however, is that there
is no such thing as a "will of the people." True, majorities can often be
obtained, either for men, or on one side or another of issues, especially if
there is only one choice to be made. But the getting of a majority depends on
how the issues are stated and the personal appeal of candidates. In short, the
statement of issues and the formulation of the candidate's opinions are crucial.
These are pressure points for manipulating decisions in democracies. They are
the points occupied by intellectuals. Democracy, then, is the means by which
intellectuals would exercise control over and produce the kinds of conformity
they desire.

It has been made to appear that, by voting, the individual increases his control
over his affairs. This is only the case, however, if he successfully votes to
reduce government involvement in his affairs. If he votes to increase government
action, as he does if he votes for the programs of gradualist socialism, he
votes to diminish his own control over his life and affairs. He may be induced
to do this by the promise of benefits, benefits which will free him from many of
his individual responsibilities. But when he does this he is only voting himself
greater responsibility for others and less control over how it will be
exercised.

## Democracy in Sweden

Sweden is one of the most democratic countries in the world. Not only is there
universal suffrage but also a great variety of consultative and mediative
mechanisms by and through which people may express themselves. There is even an
official known as an Ombudsman who has the power to penetrate and hold the
bureaucracy to account. No group, at least organized group, is apt to be ignored
when some decision is made which would affect its interests. Collective
decisions are a la mode in Sweden, and the Swedes have applied their passion for
orderliness to see that as little as possible is done without consulting the
collectivity. All of which is just another way of saying that the Swedes have
lost much of their individual liberty and control over their lives and property.
The screws on the individual which make him conform to the collective will are
continually being tightened.

One of the most obvious ways in which Swedes individually have lost much of
their control over their affairs is by way of taxation. On the average, Swedish
workers work over forty hours per week. According to reports, they work hard
when they work; and pay in much of industry is on a piece work basis, which is
certainly conducive to productivity. Local and national income taxes take away
about a third of their pay on the average. Taxes rise sharply on those with
higher incomes and go to as much as 71 per cent. The well-to-do also pay a
"wealth" tax on top of the regular income, but there is, mercifully, a ceiling
of 80 per cent on the combined national and local taxes on income.

A general sales tax of 10 per cent on the cost of items bought prevails. In
addition, unusually high taxes are levied on gasoline, liquor, beer, cigarettes,
and chocolates, among other things. Technically, the pension fund is financed by
employer contributions. In fact, of course, this payment is a wage cost and is a
reduction of employee wages or employer income or both. This last aside,
however, it is not uncommon for a workman to lose 50 per cent of his pay to
direct taxes. Then there is the ubiquitous and invisible tax
gatherer—inflation–and Swedes have been hard hit by it as have most other
peoples. Of course corporation profits are taxed, taxed, that is, if they are
not placed in an investment fund, taxed at a rate of up to about 53 per cent of
combined national and local levies.

It should be clear that the individual loses personal control over all his money
taken by taxation, whether direct or indirect. According to social democratic
theory, the control over that portion lost by the individual passes over to the
collectivity. The matter is not so simple, however, for so long as there is a
choice people are by no means united as to how or whether the money should be
taken and spent. For example, in the late 1950′s, a major controversy developed
in Sweden over the proposal by the Social Democrats for a supplementary pension
program. Following a national election in which the program was a major issue,
the legislature passed the measure by a vote of 115 to 114. This was surely not
the expression of a collective will but the imposition of a measure on the whole
populace by the narrowest of majorities.

## The Housing Shortage

Probably the best known infelicity of Social Democratic Sweden is its housing
shortage. It is a good example, too, of how the Swedes have lost effective
control over their affairs and are thwarted in their aims by government policy.
There are two aspects to the housing shortage. One is that there is a shortage
of housing in places where it is wanted. The other is that the dwellings
available are remarkably small. The majority of city dwellers live in
apartments, and these generally run to 2½ rooms each. One-fourth of urban
dwellings have but one to two rooms.

Both kinds of shortage are a result of government practice and policy. Rent
controls over many years have kept rents below what they would be in a free
market. Hence, private builders have seen little advantage to be gained from
building places for rent. A remoter reason for the shortage of houses has been
the rapid industrialization in the twentieth century. As a result more than 75
per cent of Swedes now live in towns and cities. There is reason to believe that
this industrialization and urbanization has been accelerated by government
policy which favors capital expenditure.

It looks, too, as if the government were deliberately going about creating a
housing shortage. Much urban housing has been demolished, under the claim that
slums were being cleared away, but a goodly amount of this housing was quite
habitable and much more commodious than the housing built to replace it. In any
case, government determines what housing is provided. As one writer says, "The
government and local authorities erect a third of all new dwellings, and almost
all housing projects are backed by government loans. It is the government that
decides on the number of housing starts each year, enforces building standards,
and subsidizes pensioners and low-income families to about 25 per cent of their
rent."[^17_1]

It is a result of government policy that apartments are so small. One aim of
this policy is egalitarian, to see that every Swede has a "quality" dwelling. To
put it another way, if everyone cannot have a large house, then no one should
have one. But the matter goes deeper than that. The government has, after
painstaking calculation and consideration, decided what sort of housing people
need. It has decided what size and what components a kitchen should have. It has
decided that central heat, double glazed windows, and garbage disposal chutes
are needed rather than more space for rooms. It has set the kind of limitations
on what is to be included so as to make it expensive to build very small
accommodations. Large families are almost unthinkable in the postage-stamp
houses, and Swedes must long for summer when they can get out of the stifling
atmosphere of their houses into the open spaces.

## Declining Population

Sweden is in a squeeze from the make-up of the population, and no relief is in
sight. The basic problem is that a larger and larger percentage of the
population is reaching retirement age. The low birth rate is not replenishing
the population. In consequence, a smaller and smaller work force is having to
carry the burden of feeding and caring for that portion of the population that
is retired. The increase of productivity per worker might make it possible to
continue for a while, but it should be noted that this could only be
accomplished by denying to the workers any benefits from the increased
productivity.

Moreover, if earlier analysis is correct, government policies already encourage
much wasteful capital spending, spending which may indeed increase the
productivity of workmen but which requires much more work to replace the
equipment being retired. About the only area in which the Swedes could move to
enhance their productivity would be to use all the time that goes into social
planning, consultation, negotiation, and other such activities for productive
purposes. But if they were to do so it would be to abandon democratic socialism.

The Swedes have invested a great deal of intelligence, ingenuity, and
determination into making their variety of socialism work. Of this, there should
be no doubt. They have done so under as near optimum conditions as are likely to
be found on this planet. They have avoided participation in wars that would have
cost so much and returned so little of a material character. They had a
homogenous population which should be ideal for collectivism. They have
benefited much from international peace. They have avoided internal revolution,
or anything approaching it. They have modernized with great vigor, taken
advantage of specialization of labor, and promoted capital accumulation and
investment with a will.

## A Mechanical System

The result of this effort and ingenuity is this: The Swedes have probably come
as close to creating a materialistic and mechanical system as it would be
possible to do. Does it work? It works as well, and as ill, as a materialistic
and mechanical system is likely to do. It works to inhibit the able and
adventuresome and to reward the less talented and least venturesome. It works to
produce a modernistic sameness which may have sweep to it as viewed from a
distance but is stifling from inside. Office space is determined by the amount
reckoned to be enough to keep the worker from being overcome by claustrophobia.
It works to stifle every grain of idealism that ever was raised by socialism.

The Swedes are a proud and stubborn people. They have labored for a lifetime to
establish their variety of socialism and to make it work. If they are aware of
the loss of liberty, they are not given to admitting it, or that they miss it.
If loss of control over their property troubles them, they do not make much over
it. Businessmen are acclimated to the manipulations by which it is often
possible to operate in a thoroughly politicized economy.

Is the natural progression of gradualist socialism toward tyranny? One way to
answer this question is to say that from its outset it is in one sense
tyrannical. It is tyrannical in that it makes the individual conform to the
majority or collective will. It is tyrannical in that it forces the individual
into the mold of experts, social planners, and the lowest common denominator of
the popular will. It forces the individual to deny himself and to bow to the
will of others. It forces the individual into a life of continual compromise,
compromise between the way he would do something and what the law requires,
compromises between what he wants done and what others who have managed to get
behind them the power of government want done.

## Denial of Conscience

The tendency of democratic socialism is to make the individual deny himself in
all those ways in which he is unique, different, or peculiar. It may be the
worst tyranny of all, for it denies the individual conscience, denies it by not
allowing it room for operation in the ordinary warp and woof of life. To be
forced to yield to the collective will in the ordinary decisions of life is to
deny to the individual a significant portion of his humanity.

The shift from living under the social influence of tradition to living under
the compulsions of collectivism may occur so gradually that the individual is
hardly aware of it. It is a crucial part of the theory and practice of
gradualism that this should be so. This has been especially the case in a
country like Sweden where the outworks of tradition have been preserved while
their inwards have been eroded away. The church still stands, of course, but it
stands for very little. The home has not been outlawed, but many of its
functions have been subsumed by the state.

The moral and spiritual dimensions of life have been severed from their roots in
social democratic Sweden. This has not been done by outlawing them; Swedes have
substantive religious freedom and may spend about as much time as they will
contemplating the domain of the spirit. It is rather that an order of priorities
has been established—priorities that are material in character—which leaves
little room for the development of moral and spiritual beings.

Some of the most sensitive Swedes have given expression to the otherwise stifled
longing for a spirituality to life. Dag Hammarskjöld lived an outward life that
conformed well to social democratic prescriptions, suppressing, it may be, his
deep spirituality. "It was only after his death that it was revealed how much
... the quietly competent, serenely self-confident diplomat, was really a mystic
who had worked out a personal philosophy about the idea of life as a sacrifice."
His posthumously published diary, *Markings,* which became an international best
seller, was, by his own account, "a sort of ‘white book' on my deliberations
with myself—and God."[^17_2] He left no doubt of what he lacked and longed for
when he said, "I ask the impossible that life shall have a meaning. I fight the
impossible that life shall have a meaning."[^17_3]

## Good vs. Evil

Ingmar Bergman is surely the best known of Swedish film makers. He enjoys an
international reputation. But there is a dark and morbid character to his films,
depressingly so, it is fair to say. Bergman chooses to bare the souls of his
characters, and to have them troubled with the ancient problems, such as those
of good and evil. Bergman has attributed these preoccupations to the fact that
he grew up as the son of a minister.

"When one is born and reared in the home of a minister," Bergman has said, "one
has a chance at an early age to catch a glimpse behind the scenes of life and
death. Father conducts a funeral, father officiates at a wedding, father
performs a baptism, acts as a mediator, writes a sermon. The devil became an
early acquaintance, and, in the way of a child, it was necessary to render him
concrete..."[^17_4]

Probably it was Bergman's childhood background that acquainted him with his
themes, but his near obsession with them as an adult almost certainly stems from
the spiritually deprived character of Swedish life.

In any case, he has given us a hint in his account of his youth of what social
democratic Sweden has very nearly smothered. Birth, baptism, marriage, and
death, these are great events of life which ancient religious ritual celebrated
in their spiritual dimensions. It is most difficult to know God for those who
have not known a human father in all his dimensions. It is difficult to know
love for those who have not experienced the sacrificing love of a mother. It is
difficult to separate the sacred from the profane for those who have not
actively participated in the communion of a religious congregation. It is
difficult to know concern and care if one has not witnessed it evinced in the
help extended from neighbor to neighbor. It is difficult to develop morally if
one is denied individual choices and saved from responsibility for such as he
makes. It is these things that the paternal state eviscerates or deactivates.

## Broken Relationships

The paternal state tends to mechanize and diffuse basic human relationships. It
*is* doubtful that the baptism of a newborn infant can compete with a check from
the state awarded to the mother. Marriage is an inessential relationship to the
Swedish state, for if there is no registered father of the child the state will
make special provision to take care of it. The paternal state becomes a kind of
surrogate father of all children. So far as the state can do so, it removes the
element of sacrifice, if not love, from motherhood. Neighborhood and community
lose meaning by being nationalized and administered by a bureaucracy. State
appropriated money replaces compassion and concern. Morality and spirituality
survive in a virtual vacuum; their functions have been taken over by the
omnipresent state.

Socialism diffuses concern so broadly, so far from the natural relationships of
kinship and proximity as in neighborhoods, that the benefits the state hands out
take on the abstract character of rights rather than being suffused with warm
human concern. Care for aged parents may indeed be a burden for children, but it
is not less so for being nationalized. It is only that when it is nationalized
it is bereft of much meaning as it had. The birth of every child is a cost to
the taxpayer. The retirement of any person is a burden to the working
population. All this without benefit of being warmed by a baby's smile or
recalling the tender moments of childhood with one's own parents. It is cold,
mechanical and devoid of any but the relics of humanity.

But let us return to the question of tyranny. Will gradualist socialism proceed
to other and more easily recognized forms of tyranny? Although there is little
enough historical evidence on which to base a conclusion, there is reason to
believe that it may, though how it will come is still a matter of contingency.
One way it may come is by way of the onset of barbarism to which socialism
tends. Liberty, in practice, depends upon an underlying respect for the rights
and private realm of others. It is just this that collectivized democracy is
continually assaulting. Barbarity is a logical result of the dehumanized
relationships discussed above.

## A Displaced Concern

Care in equal measure for all the people of a nation posits a godlike concern
which is beyond most mortals. When parents cease to care for their own children,
and children for their aged parents, they do not extend that displaced concern
to all children and to all aged parents. Much more plausibly, they are not much
concerned about any children or old people. The trend toward barbarity is
already apparent in loss of concern for unborn babies and in the shunting of old
people into special "homes." Neither life, liberty, nor property are apt to be
much protected when concern and respect are sufficiently and widely lost.

There is another way in which democratic socialism may prepare the way for a
broader tyranny. Social democrats know how to deal in a variety of ways with
recalcitrant individuals. They can arrest them, levy penalties against them,
deny them favors, send them to prison, or even put them in mental institutions.
But they have only one approved way of dealing with groups or collectives,
whether these be nations, labor unions, youth organizations, or retirees. That
approved way is negotiation. The gradualist state does not negotiate with
individuals. It makes them conform or suppresses them. But groups are not to be
suppressed; concessions are to be made to them, and they are to be brought
somehow into amiable accord with other collectives.

Sweden is the example, par excellence, of this penchant of socialism to
negotiate peace among groups. The country enjoys an unusual amount of labor
peace. Despite the fact that unionization is widespread, and that employers are
organized as well, strikes are rare. (All these organizations are so closely
regulated, however, that there should be doubt as to the extent to which they
are free.) In international relations, the Swedes have both promoted
international negotiations and maintained a posture of neutrality. Swedish
diplomats have long been famous for serving as mediators.

## Revolution Dominates

Revolutionary socialism, particularly communism, poses a continual threat to
evolutionary socialism. While communists do sometimes negotiate, their methods
in general are not such as are conducive to mediation. Far from professing to
mediate differences among classes, they seek to suppress most classes. They
accept warfare among classes as the norm until such time as all "exploiting"
classes are put down. Moreover, revolutionary socialists stand ready at all
times to build upon the inevitable frustrations of evolutionary socialism.

It has been noted already that idealism can hardly survive socialism. The reason
for this is that once socialism is in power it bogs down in compromises and in
the continual pressures of groups for economic advantage. Revolution holds out
the prospect of a quite different scenario, of an end to the struggle, of a
final victory of the righteous, and of an eventual perfect justice. The social
democratic bent to mediate and negotiate among groups unfits it for dealing with
revolutionaries. It does not will to suppress them, and given this weakness the
time arrives, or may arrive, when it cannot.

In any case, the love of liberty is a diffuse thing. There is much evidence to
support the view that people are as readily enamored of freedom from
responsibility as they are of individual liberty joined to personal
responsibility. They can be and have been enticed to support measures which
reduce everyman's liberty by collectivizing responsibility. That way lies
tyranny, of one sort or another, perhaps all sorts.

Sweden represents but one variety of evolutionary socialism. It is time now to
examine another, one much nearer home.

[^17_1]: Donald S. Connery, *The Scandinavians* (New York: Simon and Schuster,
  1966), p. 296. 

[^17_2]: *Ibid.,* p. 290.

[^17_3]: *lbid.*

[^17_4]: *lbid.,* p. 436.

