# World in the Grip of an Idea: 18. The United States: A Republic and Gradualism

[Thursday, June 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/june-1978/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

If saying so made it so the United States would today be the stronghold of
capitalism and the citadel of free enterprise. Many intellectuals who deplore
this state of affairs nonetheless proclaim it to be so. The notion crops up
frequently in writings about America by Europeans. There are even Americans who
say they favor free enterprise and who declare that the United States is the
prime example of it in the world. They may be right in their judgment, but if
they are it should give more than a little pause as to the state of freedom of
enterprise in the world.

There should be no doubt that the United States was long considered as and was
in fact a land of opportunity. Immigrants poured into America from other lands
in increasing numbers after the first third of the nineteenth century. They
came, in part at least, because they hoped for and often found greater
opportunity than in the lands from which they came. There are still
opportunities in the United States today. Many of the oppressed peoples from
around the world still try to gain entry to this country. They are oppressed as
a result of the idea that has the world in its grip. But they must surely
discover when they arrive here that the idea has its grip on the vaunted land of
opportunity as well as on other lands.

How free is enterprise in the United States? No one has, to my knowledge,
devised a means for making the kind of measurements which would give a precise
answer to the question. Computers have now been made that can provide swift,
almost instantaneous, answers to all sorts of questions, but the most
sophisticated computer would be unable to tell us how free enterprise is. This
is the case mainly because there is no way to quantify the obstacles that
government puts in the way of enterprise, but there is also no way to take into
account the ways human ingenuity will discover for overcoming or getting around
these obstacles. Even so, the question can be answered with sufficient
exactitude to show that enterprise is being stifled, choked, throttled, limited,
and restrained in America, and that there is a well established trend in this
direction. And government restriction is in some way a limitation on enterprise,
and restrictions abound today.

Perhaps the best way to test how free enterprise is in America would be to
survey the obstacles that stand in the way of someone contemplating going into
business today. No brief survey can hope to cover all the obstacles; indeed,
they may now be so numerous that a lifetime would be too short to learn them.
Some of the obstacles are of such complexity that anyone contemplating going
into business in a particular locale would need expert legal advice from those
familiar with the local situation. But a survey of the obstacles can show the
character of many of the limitations and the trend toward increasing them.

## The Need for Capital

The first need of anyone going into business will almost certainly be some
capital reserves, since virtually all undertakings require capital of greater or
lesser amount. To get capital it is usually necessary either to save it oneself,
borrow it from others, or get them to invest in the enterprise. The greatest
obstacle to individual saving today is inflation, and inflation is a direct
consequence of government monopoly of the money supply and continual increase of
it. Inflation discourages saving: it even introduces doubt as to the merits of
it. Inflation reduces the value of money saved because as the money supply is
increased prices rise. This means that the saver could have bought more with the
money at the time that he first received it than he could at a later date, if
the inflation continues over a long period of time. Inflation has been almost
continual in the United States since the early 1930's and shows no signs of
abatement.

The graduated income tax is another deterrent to capital accumulation. Not only
does the United States government have such a tax but so also do most states.
The more one makes the larger proportion of it is taken by governments.
Proponents of the graduated income tax often talk about it is as if it were a
means of taking from the "haves." It is better understood in its most
devastating effects as taking from those who are "getting," for the "haves" can
sometimes avoid it entirely. At any rate, progressive taxation limits and
obstructs enterprise by making it difficult to accumulate investment capital.

Social Security payments are another inhibiting tax on those who would save to
start an enterprise, and this tax has mounted precipitously in recent years.
Social Security payments might be conceived as a system of forced saving, but
they hardly qualify as savings at all. All that is paid into it is forfeited by
the individual, forfeited as far as any control over it is concerned. He cannot
draw the money out in order to make investments. He cannot use it to take
advantage of greater opportunities as they come along. In short, so far as
saving for starting an enterprise is concerned, Social Security payments are
just so much money lost to taxation.

Borrowing offers hardly more freedom from obstruction by government than does
saving for the would-be enterpriser. Banks are the most readily available
sources of loans, but they are also probably the most severely regulated
undertakings in America today. National banks are chartered by the United States
government, and state banks by the states, thus limiting the number and variety
of such institutions.

## Bank Regulation

The federal government regulates the activities of all national banks and all
those which are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is
to say virtually all of them. State laws regulate all banks within their bounds
as to such matters as branch banking and interest rates. Most states have usury
laws which place limits on the percentage of interest to be charged. This latter
restriction is particularly obstructive to new enterprisers, for all enterprises
are risky and new ones especially so. Banks are loath to take such risks when
they can charge maximum interest on insured and government guaranteed loans.
Moreover, state and federal regulations discourage or prohibit certain types of
long term loans, and government comptrollers look carefully at the type of
collateral pledged to secure loans. Then, too, federal, state, and local
governments are competitors with private individuals for the money that is
available for lending, and they enjoy some decided advantages in this
competition. The federal government requires and/or encourages the banks to have
some proportion of their investments in government securities. Municipal bond
proceeds are exempt from federal taxes. Banks are much more likely to be able to
help a new enterpriser by discounting any paper he holds from his customers than
they are to put money directly into the enterprise.

The frustrated enterpriser may look hopefully toward incorporation and the
selling of shares in his projected business. But he will discover quickly enough
that if he decides to go "public" with his offering governments have erected
obstacles here as well. The Securities and Exchange Commission keeps a wary eye
on stock offerings, and the more recently set up consumer protection agencies
may be no less alert to what he is doing. The SEC is more than a little dubious
as to the validity of any claims that might be made about the future prospects
of the business. Should the shareholders lose for one reason or another, the new
enterpriser may find himself the object of civil, or criminal, suits by various
government agencies.

## An Array of Obstacles

People somehow manage sometimes to overcome the great variety of obstacles in
the way of it and get together sufficient capital to go into business. But in
trying to decide what business to go into they encounter another impressive
array of obstacles. In contemplating the possibilities, anyone will discover, if
he did not know already, that many sorts of enterprise are very nearly or
entirely closed to him. The coining or issuing of money has been a monopoly of
the United States government for so long that hardly anyone would conceive of it
as a potential field for enterprise.

The other most general monopoly of the United States government of a possible
business undertaking is that over the carrying of mail, especially first class
mail. In earlier times, even with the government occupying the dominant
position, there were many opportunities for entrepreneurs to engage in mail
transport and even, sometimes, delivery. Star routes, as they were called, were
serviced by individuals and private companies; trains, boats, and busses
transported mail. Now, most of those opportunities have been foreclosed. The
United States Postal Service maintains its own fleet of trucks; and privately
owned airlines are the only remaining private domestic transporters of mail of
any consequence.

There are other monopolies by the federal government, but they are not so
extensive in scope. There is the monopoly of merchandising on military posts by
the Post Exchanges. There is the monopoly of the generating and sale of
electricity in some regions such as the Tennessee Valley.

The Panama Canal Zone has long been the most thoroughgoing monopoly of the
United States government. "Private parties are not allowed to own any land in
the Zone and private businesses do not operate there. Therefore, the many other
businesses in the Zone other than the Panama Canal are maintained and operated
by the Panama Canal Company. These businesses include a steamship line between
New York and the Isthmus of Panama; a railroad across the Isthmus, the cargo
docks and piers and harbor terminal facilities on the Isthmus; a coaling plant
for ships; an oil-handling plant; commissary stores...; a printing plant;
restaurants, theaters, bowling alleys," and so forth.[^18_1] If Communists do
take over the Canal Zone they will find their basic work has already been done.

The federal government now virtually monopolizes intercity rail passenger
transport by way of AMTRAK and is extending its sway into freight hauling by way
of CONRAIL.

State governments have also established various monopolies. The most dramatic of
these may well be that over the sale of liquor and certain other alcoholic
beverages. About one-third of the states have a monopoly of the sale of at least
some of the alcoholic beverages. Where there are state liquor stores, those who
are considering going into some legal business must put this area of potential
opportunity out of mind. But even where states do not own and operate the
stores, there are usually strenuous restrictions upon entry into such
undertakings.

Although neither the federal nor state governments monopolize the manufacture of
spiritous liquors, their laws and prohibitions are such that in effect they
secure a monopoly to a select few domestic and foreign manufacturers. During
much of American history no single undertaking, besides farming, had so many
entrepreneurs as distilling, and many farmers supplemented their income with the
product from their "stills." These distillers have now become an endangered
species as a result of decades of relentless search for and pursuit of them by
"Revenuers."

States generally have a variety of monopolies. For example:

> The state of New York has long maintained a system of barge canals 525 miles
> in length, which it operates at public expense, charging no tolls. The
> Commonwealth of Massachusetts, since 1918, has operated the transit system of
> Boston and neighboring cities and towns. Harbor facilities at ocean
> ports—wharves, docks, warehouses and the like—are usually owned by state
> governments. At New Orleans a State Board of Port Commissioners, formed in
> 1896, operates grain elevators, coffee terminals, banana conveyors, cranes,
> derricks, a belt line railway, a canal, and a free trade zone....[^18_2]

Local governments generally have several monopolies which exclude private
enterprise. Municipalities frequently monopolize trash and garbage collection,
water distribution, sale of electricity, distribution of natural gas, and bus or
other street and subway systems. At one time, virtually all local transportation
systems were privately owned and operated, but price and service restrictions
became such a handicap that cities took them over.

Indeed, the whole field of transportation is now very nearly closed to
enterprisers. Railroading was so regulated by the Interstate Commerce Commission
that it ceased to be a growth business. Nowadays, a would-be enterpriser would
be as likely to think of building a railroad as he would to go into
manufacturing buggies. City transport is not a viable opportunity, and it is
being made less so by massive government grants for the building of rail
systems. It is possible to go into trucking, but the obstacles to doing so are
such that only the most intrepid enterpriser would venture into the field. Taxis
are so regulated in most cities, and the privilege of operating one so
restricted that opportunity in this field is limited. Entry into the air
transport business is hampered by the Civil Aeronautics Board, and it sometimes
takes years for established carriers to get authorization to provide new service
to some city or locale.

## Government Schools

The field of education has never been a particularly good arena for private
enterprisers, and it is generally becoming less so today. Laws requiring school
attendance for young people have taken that facet of education out of the realm
of economic goods, that plus the fact that "free" public schools are provided.
Such private schools and colleges as exist are usually subsidized by gifts and
tax-free contributions, hence making it difficult for anyone to enter the field
in the hope of profit. On the fringes of education, e.g., teaching various
skills such as auto repairing or barbering, there used to be considerable
opportunity for enterprisers to found and operate schools. These are being hard
pressed today, however, by vocational courses in the public high schools and by
the vocational emphasis in many government funded trade schools and community
colleges. Governments are well on their way to monopolizing education by using
their taxing powers to exclude competitors.

Many hospitals were once privately owned and operated, but such hospitals are
rare today. The Hill-Burton Act brought large doses of federal money to hospital
building and gave encouragement to government owned and operated hospitals. It
would be exceedingly difficult today to raise the capital necessary to provide
the expensive equipment necessary to compete with government owned hospitals.

Governments at all levels are vigorous competitors in providing recreation
facilities. This is particularly true for parks, zoos, golf courses, swimming
pools, lakes, and-waterways. Many buildings in which recreation activities take
place—e.g., auditoriums, ball parks, civic centers—are now being built with tax
funds. Not only does the prospective enterpriser find his potential savings
taken away in taxes to support such undertakings but also his entry into such
enterprises made difficult by government competition.

## Research and Information

The federal government is in the research and information business in a big way.
The Government Printing Office is enormous, and keeps busy printing numerous
pamphlets, making available research reports, publishing agricultural treatises,
and providing information for businessmen. A United States Senator pointed out a
while back that the Commerce Department gathers around 100,000 research and
development reports each year, and that the government spends approximately $10
billion each year on research.[^18_3] Although governments have not pre-empted
the information field, they have made great inroads into it.

There are, of course, enterprises that can be started in which there is little
direct competition from government, but there are obstacles to be overcome in
going into any of these. A minimum requirement in almost any locale is to get a
license. Beyond that, many undertakings require a charter or franchise from some
one or more governments. Many kinds of undertaking have special training or
knowledge or moral requirements. For example, barbers may have had to have spent
a specified length of time in training in a state recognized school, nurses to
have undergone a particular regimen, teachers to have taken certain education
courses in order to be certified, real estate salesmen to have passed a written
examination, plumbers to have served an apprenticeship, saloon-keepers to have
conformed to certain moral standards, and so on. Lawyers usually have to pass
the bar examination in the states in which they wish to practice.

It may be instructive in getting some idea of how far this goes to look at this
partial list, in one state, of those agencies charged with overseeing certain
undertakings: State Board of Accountancy, State Board for Examination,
Qualification and Registration of Architects, Commission for Auctioneers, State
Board of Examiners for Speech Pathology and Audiology, State Board of Barbers,
Board of Chiropractic Examiners, State Board of Cosmetology, State Board of
Dentistry, State Board of Electrical Contractors, State Board of Engineers and
Land Surveyors, State Board of Registration for Foresters, State Board of
Funeral Service, State Board of Registration for Professional Geologists, State
Board of Hearing Aid Dealers and Dispensers, Board of Landscape Architects,
Board of Physical Therapy, State Board of Private Detective and Private Security
Agencies, State Board of Examiners for Sanitarians, Commission of Structural
Pest Control, Board for Registration of Used Car Dealers, State Board of
Registration for Used Motor Vehicle Parts Dealers, Motor Vehicle Dismantlers,
and Motor Vehicle Rebuilders. The list is not complete by any means, but the
point perhaps emerges.

Anyone going into business has to have some place from which to operate, i.e.,
land, buildings, or offices. If he needs land, he will find himself in
competition—though that hardly seems to be the right word—with federal, state,
and local governments for the dwindling supply of land. Governments were once
the great sellers of land in America, but they have now reversed the field and
become major buyers—perhaps "condemners" would be more descriptive—: for
military installations, for parks and forests, for highways, for urban renewal
projects, for hospitals, for lakes and dams, for schools, and so forth. As one
writer puts it, the federal government "is the biggest landlord on earth, aside
from the communist countries."[^18_4]

## Restrictions on Land Use and Building

Of course, the land and building will have to be selected with care if one is
going into business. There are increasing restrictions on land use in the United
States. Zoning laws have been around since the 1920's, though they get ever
stricter, and they are now being supplemented with land use laws in many states
for rural areas. But lately the United States government has gone into
comprehensive land use control, or very nearly that, under the auspices of the
Environmental Protection Agency. The government has asserted its sovereignty
over land use to protect water, air, endangered species, and what have you.
Anyone thinking in terms of operating a factory or manufacturing establishment
must undertake the difficult task of assuring state and federal agencies, by way
of surveys and tests, that he will not significantly harm the environment within
which he locates.

Although the above are only a partial listing of the obstacles which a would-be
enterpriser must overcome, let us suppose now that our enterpriser has managed
to set himself up in business. However improbable it may seem, however much of
at least a minor miracle it surely is, some men are actually able to begin new
enterprises in the United States. They manage to accumulate the savings
necessary despite the inflationary thrust, the progressive income taxes and the
burden of Social Security or manage to borrow the money despite restrictions
that make this difficult, or even succeed in selling stock in a corporation so
as not to arouse the ire of the SEC. They select an undertaking that is not
monopolized by government or that government competition has not effectively
foreclosed. They get franchised, certified, licensed, authorized, permitted,
qualified or whatever, find some land on which to locate in which their kind of
undertaking is allowed, and satisfy the authorities that they will live in
harmony with the environment.

## A Senior Partner

Such an enterpriser is by no means out of the woods, however, simply because he
has managed to open his doors for business. Indeed, it would be more correct to
say that many of his troubles have just begun. The man who enters business
discovers rather soon, if he did not know it already, that he has a Senior
Partner—government. More precisely, he has a committee of Senior Partners,
composed of federal, state, county, and, depending upon the locale, township and
municipal authorities. These Partners may have thrown any number of obstacles in
the way of his going into business in the first place; they may be in
competition with him; they may have made low interest loans to his competitors
or even granted them special privileges which he does not enjoy. They will
rarely have invested anything in the business themselves. Yet once he opens his
doors these Partners join the firm, so to speak.

In the first place, the Senior Partners require the businessman to be a tax
collector. If he sells to consumers, he will generally be expected to collect
federal excise taxes and state and local sales taxes. If he employs other people
he will be expected to withhold federal and probably state and local income
taxes from their wages. Under most conditions, he must collect the workers'
Social Security taxes by way of payroll deductions. Some cities have employment
taxes which he may have to collect.

No matter how small his business may be, the Senior Partners will require that
the businessman keep extensive and precise records of his various transactions.
He will need records, of course, of the taxes he has collected from others, and
records for his own income and Social Security taxes.

The Senior Partners are not particularly mollified by getting the first fruits
from any income and having the businessman collect taxes for them. They take an
active role in determining how the business should be run. If he sells to
consumers, various federal and state consumer agencies may take the side of his
customers against him and haul him into court on their behalf or because he has
not complied with one or more of the multitude of laws governing these
relationships. In like manner, the Senior Partners stand ready to intrude in a
great variety of ways on behalf of his employees against the businessman
employer. They have, of course, generally specified that he cannot employ those
who have not attained a certain age. They prescribe minimum wages, maximum
hours, time and a half for overtime, and have long been solicitous of female
employees.

Of late, federal and state governments have exerted themselves to see that
employers do not discriminate in hiring because of race, sex, age, color,
religion, or country of national origin, among other things. In order to prove
that he does not do so, an employer is often bidden to take Affirmative Action
to assure that he has the proper "mix" of minorities amongst his workers and be
diligent in promoting such of these as he has assembled to the better positions
he has available.

If his employees should decide to organize themselves into a labor union, the
National Labor Relations Board has laid down all sorts of rules to which the
businessman employer must comply. Should he be judged to have failed to comply
he may well find himself saddled with back wages to pay and employees on his
payroll whom he would prefer to do without.

## Safety and Health

The Senior Partners concern themselves, too, with the safety and health of the
businessman's employees. To that end, OSHA, a federal agency, promulgates all
sorts of rules and standards for safeguarding the health of employees. Should an
employer fail to comply with these standards he is subject to potentially heavy
penalties.

Particular industries are subject to their own kinds of regulation. For example,
the powers of the Federal Power Commission over producers and sellers of
electric power show the extent to which the interference of a Senior Partner may
go. It exercises the following powers:

> Prescribes and enforces a uniform system of accounts for privately owned
> public utilities engaged in the transmission, or sale or wholesale of electric
> power in interstate commerce; determines the original cost and accrued
> depreciation of facilities for the generation and transmission of such energy;
> investigates and regulates the rates, charges and services for such energy;
> passes upon application of such utilities for authority to issue securities,
> to dispose of, merge or consolidate facilities, to interconnect facilities, or
> to acquire securities of other public utilities; passes upon applications of
> persons seeking authority to hold interlocking positions; evaluates
> applications for and, when in the public interest, issues permits for the
> construction, operation, maintenance or connection of facilities at the
> borders of the United States for the exportation or importation of electric
> energy; passes upon applications for authority to export electric energy for
> the United States.[^18_5]

The Senior Partners are also potential customers of the businessman. The federal
government is today the largest purchaser of goods and services in the country.
When it is joined by states and local governments, the role of government as
purchaser is an immense one indeed. Needless to say, these governments extend
additional authority over anyone from whom they buy goods or services. A seller
does not just offer his custom in the market to government; government uses the
leverage of a buyer to further control the businessman's business.

The above only scratches the surface of government intervention in the economy
today, but perhaps enough has been told to warrant a conclusion. Enterprise is
not free in the United States today. It is hampered, obstructed, restrained,
constrained, restricted, limited, compelled, and otherwise confined by a
multitude of regulations, requirements, and government competition. And there is
a well established tendency to increase the intervention more and more over the
years. Occasional "deregulation" is overmatched by restrictions introduced from
other directions. For example, farm crops are not controlled as much now as they
were twenty years ago, but land use restrictions are being introduced into rural
areas.

## Gradual Intrusions

Thirty or forty years ago there was considerable debate over whether the United
States should have a planned economy or not. The issue was not resolved by the
debate, but it has been largely resolved in practice by step by step intrusions
into the economy. By government's regulatory powers, control over the money
supply and hence over credit and banking, over education, over the
communications industries, over transportation, over labor, over the
environment, and so forth, planning is widely established today. In most of the
United States today, no structure can be erected without permits, inspections,
compliance with setback ordinances, zoning laws, and other such restrictions.
Government subsidies to cities and regions determine the character and direction
of developments in those areas.

A broader conclusion is warranted, too. The United States is under the sway of
the idea that has the world in its grip. Whatever the merits or demerits of any
or all of the government interventions discussed, one assumption underlies and
powers them all: namely, individuals and voluntary associations of men cannot be
trusted to provide for themselves and others by pursuing their own
self-interest. They must be directed and controlled in their activities by an
interest that is outside of and above them as individuals. Self-interest of
individuals must be contained, restrained, and redirected—ultimately rooted
out—, and for it must be substituted what is supposedly in the common interest.
The instrument for imposing this common interest is government. That is the
idea.

Under the sway of the idea, government has asserted its power into virtually
every area of American life. Government has grown mighty and the individual weak
and limited. How did this state of affairs come about? It is certainly a
reversal of the idea on which these United States were founded. The United
States was founded as a republic. Both the United States and the state
governments operate under the auspices of written constitutions. The idea that
informed these constitutions was that governments should be limited in order
that individuals might be freed—freed to pursue their own interests in order to
fulfill themselves as best they could and according to their own lights.

## Keeping the Peace

It is, of course, the end of government that those within its jurisdiction shall
be protected in their life, liberty, and property from harmful intrusions by
others. To that end, governments were empowered to legislate, to use force, and
to resolve disputes which threatened the peace in order that men might go about
their affairs undisturbed by malefactors.

But beyond the granting of powers believed necessary to maintain governments
which could keep the peace, put down domestic insurrection, and repel foreign
invaders, the main efforts of the constitutions were to limit the governments
they authorized. It was for this purpose that bills of rights were incorporated
in them. It was to this end that the powers of government were separated into
three branches. The listing of powers granted was supposed to constitute an
inherent limit upon government. Even the dispersion of power into federal and
state jurisdictions was thought to act to limit the exercise of power. If this
was not the aim and purpose of the United States Constitution then those who
successfully argued for its adoption were themselves either deceived or engaged
in deceiving others.

Among the opponents of ratification of the Constitution of 1787 (the United
States Constitution), not one could be found who did so because the government
lacked power. On the contrary, it was the fear that it would become powerful and
oppressive that animated them. A goodly number of men in that day took the time
and made the effort to study the history of governments. One conclusion stood
out among all the others that they drew: All governments tend to become
oppressive. Few would have dared to rise in the conventions in those days,
amidst the displays of historical erudition, to proclaim that men vested with
the power of government have been so transformed that they could be trusted with
determining what is for the well-being of those in their jurisdiction. On the
contrary, it was settled opinion that those who govern will pursue power to the
detriment of the well-being of their fellows if they are not deflected from the
course. Limited constitutional government offered the best means they could
conceive for delaying, if not ultimately preventing, the appearance of the
oppressive tendency of government.

## How It Happened

How, then, did this reversal take place? How were many of the confines on
government removed and did government begin to confine the individual more and
more? A portion of the answer is not difficult to find. It came about gradually,
and step by step. Probably, none envisioned that when national banks were given
a monopoly of the issue of bank notes in the 1860's by placing a prohibitive tax
on state bank notes that in the 1960's virtually all concrete limitations on the
money supply would be removed and that such powers as remained over the money
supply would be under the control of the federal government. Yet the stage was
being set for this course of events, not with malice aforethought but by a
process of accretion of power.

Another point can be asserted here; it has been written about and documented
elsewhere, and the present theme precludes discussion of it in detail. The point
is this, Americans, or a significant portion of them, came under the sway of the
idea that has the world in its grip.6 That is, they came to believe that when
individuals pursue their self-interest it is detrimental to the general welfare,
that the supports to the individual should be removed and the individual
confined, and that government was the proper instrument to perform these
undertakings. Although the idea generally goes by the name of socialism, most
Americans never consciously became socialists and, of those who did, few avowed
it. The attack upon the American system and the intrusion of government was done
piecemeal. Yet when the development is viewed whole, it makes sense only in
terms of the prevalence of the socialist idea.

It is important, however, to delve somewhat into the methods by which government
power has been concentrated and unloosed. The dispersion of power by which these
United States began had to be overcome and evaded. How this was accomplished
needs now to be told.

Next: *19. The United States: The Concentration of Power.*

[^18_1]: Harold Koontz and Richard W. Gable, *Public Control of Economic
  Enterprise* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1956), pp. 684-85.

[^18_2]: Clair Wilcox, *Public Policies Toward Business* (Homewood, Illinois:
  Richard D. Irwin, 1960), pp. 805-06.

[^18_3]: William Proxmire, *Can Small Business Survive?* (Chicago: Henry
  Regnery, 1964), pp. 99-101.

[^18_4]: Koontz and Gable, *op. cit.,* p. 695.

[^18_5]: Cornelius P. Cotter, *Government and Private Enterprise* (New York:
  Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1960), pp.  227-28.

