# World in the Grip of an Idea: 19. The United States: The Concentration of
  Power

[Saturday, July 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/july-1978/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between Ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

Politics, it has been said, is the art of compromise. But compromise is not the
object of politics; it is only a method. The end of politics is to gain and
maintain control over the instruments of power over people. Politics is, then,
the art of the struggle for power, any kind of power, but above all the power
residing in government. There are other ways of gaining political power, of
course. The most common way, historically, has been to inherit it. Another way
has been by conquest. The *coup d'etat* has also been used, but this usually
involves some combination of the methods mentioned earlier. But in modern day
democracies, the approved way of gaining and maintaining power is by politics.
That is certainly the case in the United States.

The primary task of those who wished to introduce socialism in the United States
was to get control of political power. There were a considerable variety of such
socialists in the latter part of the nineteenth century. There were anarchists,
syndicalists, Marxists, nationalists, unionists, and other sorts of socialists.
They made what political splash they made, at the outset, with inflationist
schemes of one sort or another. In the early twentieth century, the Socialist
Party, under the leadership of Eugene Debs, emerged and gained considerable
following as a minor party until the end of World War I. It continued to exist
thereafter but ceased to grow. Indeed, it went into a decline from which it has
never recovered. The Communist Party, under the leadership of William Z. Foster
and others, had even less political success.

But even before the 1920's many of those who were inclined toward socialism had
concluded that they could not attain power in America by professing to be
socialists. Most Americans simply would not buy the package of socialism when it
was wrapped in that way. The best way to move toward socialism would be by way
of the established political parties and by gaining footholds in governmental
and other institutions. There was no need to call particular programs
socialistic and to describe their adoption as a movement toward socialism. In
fact, it would be counterproductive to do so. Much better to advance them as
cures for particular problems and as made necessary by changing conditions. The
Fabians in England had pointed the way, and the American socialists modified
their tactics to fit their own conditions.

## A Surreptitious Movement

The movement toward socialism in the United States has been surreptitious, even
sneaky, and infiltrative in character. Even so, it has not been directed by some
master plan conceived by some planner, or planners. Nor has it been advanced, by
and large, by a conspiracy. It would be easier to understand if there were a
master plan and a well-organized conspiracy. But the evidence does not warrant
the drawing of any such conclusion. A conspiracy is, after all, an agreement
between two or more people to do something illegal. Whereas, the distinctive
feature of gradualist socialism is that it will achieve its goals legally.
(Communists have, of course, often engaged in illegal acts, been under the
control of foreign powers, and been parts of conspiracies. However, communism is
an adjacent movement to the main thrust toward socialism in America and has
never been in control of it.)

Moreover, the movement toward socialism is not done by a plan in the United
States. It is not a plan but a method. There is an objective: It is to gain
control of political power and transform America. The method is to employ those
means which, at any given time, give the greatest promise of producing the
desired results. This method is called pragmatism, and its practitioners pride
themselves on their lack of commitment to any overall plan or strategy.
Pragmatists feel their way toward their objective, thrusting through at weak
spots and turning aside when resistance becomes so great as to threaten failure.

Though the goal of the gradualist socialist movement in America is
power—political power—, it is not, as such, a political movement. It is, at
bottom, an intellectual movement, a movement aimed at controlling what men
think, or at the least establishing a subtle authority over what men say. Those
who persist in thinking of it as a political movement will ever have difficulty
in grasping how it could maintain a coherent direction without a master plan and
planners. Once it is understood as a set of ideas, an ideology, this difficulty
disappears. The coherent direction derives from the ideology.

Anyone who is to any extent under the sway of the ideology can perceive which
proposals for the use of government power are most in keeping with it. Those who
do not subscribe to the ideology are disciplined by denying them the advantages
that stem from adherence to the prevailing ideology. It requires no conspiracy
to carry out the punishment or ostracism; it does require the concurrence of
true believers in the ideology. In addition to the concurrence of true
believers, the thrust toward socialism is accomplished in America by the desire
of many to be in keeping with what they believe to be intellectual fashion or
their fear of flouting it.

A great deal more could be said on this head, but only so much need be said as
will put at naught the notion that what follows is an account of action by an
organized conspiracy. Viewed in retrospect, the thrust toward socialism in
America—or, for that matter, in the world—may appear to follow a pattern, a
pattern such as events have when they are planned and directed by some body of
men. This pattern arises from two sources: one, there is a direction, of sorts,
to the course of development; two, the historian organizes them for the telling
so that the events have a greater coherence than they had in reality. At any
rate, what follows is an effort to explain how the thrust toward socialism
gained momentum and power over the American people.

## Powers Dispersed

The United States government was deliberately designed to thwart the efforts of
any one man or group of men from gaining any continuing control over it. To that
end, the powers of the federal government were separated into three branches, as
were those of the states. Further, the powers of government were dispersed by
granting certain powers to the general government and reserving others to the
states. In addition, some powers have been specifically denied to the general
government and others to the states. Some of the other safeguards against the
concentration of power were: staggering the terms of Senators so that only
one-third of the Senate is to be elected at any one time, having Congressmen
elected for two-year terms and the President for four, and providing for an
appointed judiciary. The states have generally dispersed their powers by having
them exercised by municipalities, counties, and other local governments. All
these arrangements tended both to prevent the concentration of power and its use
by any faction for its own purposes.

Anyone conversant with developments in government in the twentieth century knows
that these obstacles to concentrating power and its regular use by a faction—a
faction under the sway of the idea that has the world in its grip—have been
largely overcome or circumvented. How it has come about does, however, need to
be explained. It has not come about, not to any significant extent, by
amendments to the United States Constitution. The separation of powers among the
branches still formally exists. The reserve of powers to the states has been
only slightly altered by amendment. The constitutional protections of life,
liberty, and property can still be found stated in the cadences of
eighteenth-century rhetoric. But much of the substance has been drained away
while the forms still stand.

In the broadest terms, here is what has happened. Power in the United States is
today concentrated where it is least subject to popular control and most
amenable to manipulation by intellectuals and intellectual fashion. More
specifically, it is concentrated in the executive branch, the courts, and the
bureaucracy. Preceding and accompanying this has been the concentration of power
in the federal government. The federal government is the most amenable of
governments to ideological influence brought to bear by the press, national
magazines, television, book publishers, and other media of communication. In a
similar fashion, the executive branch, the courts, and the bureaucracy are
readily swayed by these ideological influences.

## Lack of Popular Control Over Federal Government

Vast political power is exercised today by those in the federal government over
whom there is little or no popular control. This state of affairs came about
gradually over the better part of a century. Indeed, in the case of the Federal
courts the potential was there from the beginning. Federal judges were always
appointed by the President subject to the approval of the Senate. Their tenure
in office is for life or during good behavior. But the "good behavior"
requirement early became largely a dead letter because of the failure of
Congress to persist with impeachments. Thus, the courts have ever had but a
tangential relation to popular control.

This was by design, of course. The idea was that the judiciary should be
independent, independent of politics so as to make their determinations
according to law. This was a noble concept and was reasonably workable so long
as judges believed themselves to be bound by the Constitution, by precedent, and
by reason. But a subtle change began to occur in the latter part of the
nineteenth century. Legal realism, as it is sometimes called, began to replace
the concept of fixed and immutable laws. What was the law began to be thought of
as something that was changing, relative, and subject to continual mutation.
This set the stage for a judiciary that was not only independent of politics but
independent also of the received law. To an amazing extent, the Supreme Court
became a law unto itself, upsetting and ignoring precedent and ruling by
pronouncements which were considered binding upon the lower courts.

Popular control over the bureaucracy declined as Civil Service reform made
headway. The idea of having a body of civil servants who would be professionals
free from the shifting political tides had broad appeal in the latter part of
the nineteenth century. It got much impetus from the fact that President James
A. Garfield was assassinated by a disappointed job seeker. Thereafter, a tenured
civil service began to be created. Over the years, more and more employees came
under it.

## Tenured Civil Service

Having a tenured civil service did not matter so much as long as the sway and
activities of the federal government were limited. But in the twentieth century,
as the federal government intervened in more and more matters and began to touch
and control the lives of Americans in an ever greater variety of ways, the
effect of having an independent and tenured civil service became something else
again. So far as the bureaucracy was the government, they were controlling the
lives of people but were themselves subject to very little popular (political?)
control.

Another significant development in cutting government loose from popular control
and concentrating power was in the authorization of independent commissions. The
Interstate Commerce Commission was the first of these bodies. It was created in
1887 and given limited powers over the railroads but has since had its powers
greatly augmented and extended over other forms of transportation. It has since
been joined by a goodly number of other such organizations, among them the
Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Power Commission, the Civil Aeronautics
Board, and others.

Only a tenuous control over these organizations is maintained by the elective
branches of the government. They are authorized by Congress, their members
approved by the Senate after nomination by the President, and after that they
proceed more or less on their own. Generally, they combine in single bodies
powers of government that were separated by the United States Constitution. That
is, they legislate—create a body of administrative law by their decisions;
execute—carry into effect their rulings; and adjudicate—hold hearings and make
decisions which often have the effect of law.

Not only do these independent commissions concentrate powers within the federal
government but they also have tended to claim large new powers for the federal
government. By way of them, the federal government exercises extensive powers
over transportation, electricity, money and banking, basic fuels, and labor
relations. Nowadays, by way of their sway over energy and the environment, the
federal government reaches through to the most basic undertakings of Americans.

## Presidential Power

The growth of power vested in a bureaucracy was long paralleled by and even was
an augmentation of presidential power. Presidential power began to dominate the
other branches during the administrations of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow
Wilson. It became preeminent during the three terms plus a fraction of another
of Franklin D. Roosevelt. These Presidents proceeded to dominate the legislative
branches by setting forth programs—described respectively as the Square Deal,
New Freedom, and New Deal—which they undertook to push through Congress. Once
these programs were enacted into legislation, the executive branch was usually
given many new powers and more extensive ones.

After the death of Franklin Roosevelt, three Democratic Presidents—Truman,
Kennedy, and Johnson—attempted to advance similar broad programs under the
rubrics of the Fair Deal, the New Frontier, and the Great Society. Truman,
however, faced increasing opposition to his programs, and Kennedy was
assassinated before he managed to translate much of his program into
legislation. (In fact, until the media transformed Kennedy into a folk hero
following his assassination, he had made little mark on government.) In the wake
of Kennedy's assassination, President Johnson was able to *get* a multitude of
laws passed, though there have been no prophets to proclaim that the Great
Society emerged from it. But before he had served out the term to which he was
elected on his own Johnson had become so unpopular, at least among radical
elements, that he grew fearful of making public appearances and declined to run
again.

It is now possible to conclude that following World War II the tide began to
turn against presidential power. Democratic Presidents, the main architects of
the surge of presidential power, were repeatedly drawn into actions which placed
them at odds with some of the most vocal of their constituents in the
intellectual community. As Woodrow Wilson had written long before he came to the
presidency, the major constitutional opening for the increase of presidential
power is in foreign affairs. Nor can it be doubted that Presidents reached the
peak of their hold on power during wars.

After World War II, the United States was confronted with expansive communist
powers, became embroiled in a Cold War with them, and there were two hot wars,
Korea and Vietnam. Anti-communism, however, was not popular with many Democrats,
and particularly not with intellectuals. Moreover, those Americans who were
anti-communists were hardly inclined to support Presidents who conducted
lukewarm and increasingly limited wars in Korea and Vietnam. In consequence,
Presidents were unable to rally many members of their own party behind them and
alienated much of the rest of the populace by their conduct of the wars.

There have been many indications that the tide has begun to run against
presidential power. There was, of course, a Constitutional amendment, the 22nd,
ratified in 1951, limiting Presidents to two terms. There have been
congressional efforts to restrain Presidents in foreign engagements. There were
the weakened positions of both Truman and Johnson in their last years as
President. There was the forced resignation of Vice-President Agnew and the even
more dramatic resignation of President Nixon under the threat of imminent
impeachment. The attacks on the FBI and CIA, and subsequent limitations placed
on them, have had the effect of limiting the President. Moreover, President
Carter was the first Democrat elected to the office in the twentieth century who
did not run on the basis of some program name such as New Deal, Fair Deal, or
the like. Nor has Carter thus far succeeded in getting much of his proposed
legislation through Congress.

None of this should be interpreted to mean that there has been any lessening in
the trend toward concentration of power in the general government. On the
contrary, that has gone on at an accelerated pace even as presidential power was
being restrained. While Johnson was being made virtually impotent by critics of
the Vietnamese War, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare was
expanding its powers into more and more fields. Even as Nixon was approaching
disgrace, the Environmental Protection Agency and OSHA were extending their
reach into every nook and cranny of America. Vast grants made from the federal
government to states and cities during Nixon's presidency concentrated
decision-making power in Washington and continued the process of making state
and local governments administrative arms of the federal government.

Rather, the relative decline in presidential power should be interpreted as a
further decrease in popular control over this vast government with its
concentration of power. The executive branch, i.e., the bureaucracy, increases
in power as the powers of the Chief Executive decline. The Congress,
historically the branch over which there has been the most direct popular
control, does not, and cannot, exercise effective control over the bureaucracy
and the independent commissions. Congress has failed for several decades now to
restrain the judiciary, though there are ways it could do so. Presidents
exercise only the most tenuous control over the bureaucracy.

## How Bureaucracy Functions

The determinative role of bureaucracy is well described in this story which
appeared in the Atlanta *Constitution,* March 26, 1978:

> Almost nobody has heard of Joe Sherman, a $47,500-a-year federal civil
> servant. He commutes quietly to Washington every morning from a modest brick
> home in suburban Alexandria, Va. His work is seldom noticed by the press or
> the public.
>
> But Joe Sherman may have an enormous impact on the everyday lives of Americans
> for years, even generations, to come....
>
> Sherman and his staff at the Department of Housing and Urban Development are
> devising energy standards for building construction that are likely to alter
> the appearance, shape, or inner workings of every office building, hospital,
> school, factory, and private home in the United States after February 1981.
>
> The process is much like that by which thousands of other small but important
> decisions are made throughout the government. The decisions influence the type
> of food that people eat, the clothes they wear, the kinds of loans they get,
> the construction of the cars they drive.
>
> The process is usually followed very closely by the specialists with a
> financial and a professional stake, but the public mostly learns little until
> it comes time to pay the bill, use the product and learn to live—and maybe
> suffer—with the results....
>
> This is the story of how one law is being carried out. It began in 1976 when
> Congress passed the Energy Conservation Act. A little-noticed provision,
> heavily influenced by lobbyists for architects, ordered the administration to
> draw up "performance standards for new residential and commercial buildings
> which are designed to achieve the maximum practical improvements in energy
> efficiency and increases in the uses of nondepletable sources of energy."
>
> Congress often leaves laws vague like that and allows the bureaucracy to work
> out the details. It is people like Joe Sherman who must figure out just what
> Congress meant by "maximum practical."
>
> The standards, which are expected to be incorporated into building codes all
> over the country, will for the first time require that all buildings be
> designed to meet an "energy budget"—that is, they should be built to operate
> without using more than a specific amount of energy per square foot of space,
> depending on the purpose of the building and the climate where it is situated.

The vast accretion of governmental power involved in this should not go
unnoticed, either.

The Department of Health, Education and Welfare may be most correctly conceived
as a sort of independent kingdom or fiefdom set up within the bounds of the
United States and being charged with or assuming authority over some of the most
sensitive areas of American life. When it was founded during Eisenhower's
presidency it brought together a hodge-podge of bureaus which theretofore had
modest pretensions. Its activities and sway burgeoned with the spurt of
legislation during the first two years of the Johnson administration. Congress
and Presidents might have conducted diplomatic relations with it during most of
its lifetime if they could have discovered who, if anyone, was in charge of it.

If the bureaucracy, the independent commissions, and the courts—the organs of
the concentrated power of the federal government—are not under the effective
control of the elected representatives of the American people, who does control
them? One way to answer the question is to say that nobody does. And that answer
is correct so far as it goes. The President does have some little residual power
over them; the Congress does have potential power; and pressure groups do
sometimes modify their actions. But nobody controls or directs them in the
ordinary conduct of their doings. Yet it would be incorrect to suppose that each
bureaucrat or commissioner or judge simply decides his course of action, letting
his conscience be his guide, and doing as he will. It may sometimes happen, but
it is not characteristic.

As indicated earlier, the bureaucracy, the commissions, and the courts are
ruled, by and large, by intellectual fashion. It is not usually called fashion;
more commonly it has been thought of as the *zeitgeist,* spirit of the times,
intellectual milieu, or reigning ideology. These latter terms and phrases may be
more precise or comprehensive, but "fashion" captures better the way in which
the ideas work on individuals and groups.

## The Ebb and Flow of Fashions

Intellectual fashion changes even as do fashions in women's clothes. One year it
is environmentalism, another consumerism, another the eradication of poverty,
another the menace of big business, another investigative journalism aimed at
purifying politics, and so on. These intellectual fashions appear, decline,
virtually disappear, and recur much as do fashions in men's jackets, say. Just
as padded shoulders in jackets become fashionable, then not, then again, so do
fashions in prevailing ideas; the abolition of poverty was prominent in the
1890's, 1930's, and 1960's. The purification of politics was a major theme in
the early twentieth century and then again in the 1970's.

Intellectual fashion is determined in much the same manner as fashions in
clothes. Just as there are leading clothes designers, so there are leaders in
setting forth what becomes intellectual fashion. For intellectual fashion, there
have been such thinkers as John Kenneth Galbraith, Ralph Nader, Michael
Harrington, and the like. Just as among clothes designers, there is competition
for whose notions will prevail among intellectuals. And just as in clothes
design, the more radical ideas are for the *Haute Coterie.* Beneath these, those
who conform to the fashion do so in less drastic and, hence, more popular
formulations.

Underlying and supporting this shifting intellectual fashion is an ideology
which does not change. Ideology informs the continuing thrust to change,
providing its direction and substance. What is in fashion at the moment is the
leading wedge of the drive toward transformation. American intellectuals and
politicians generally pride themselves on their pragmatism, but they are
pragmatic only in changing emphases with the fashions.

Control over American government and increasingly over the lives of Americans is
exercised by intellectual fashion and the underlying ideology. It is thus that
the United States has been brought under the sway of the idea that has the world
in its grip. This was made possible by the concentration of power in the central
government and its further concentration in those areas of government most
remote from popular control. More and more people vote, but they have less and
less control over the government and their own affairs and lives.

## The Concentration of Power

The greater the concentration of power the more readily can it be manipulated by
intellectual fashion under the subtle control of ideology. It is easier to
influence one man than several, to influence the President, say, than the nine
justices of the Supreme Court. In like manner, the Supreme Court may be more
readily influenced than can 100 Senators, and the Senate more readily than the
House of Representatives. It should be equally clear that one general government
can be swayed more easily than can fifty state governments.

Influence may not be the right word; what often develops may be more correctly
understood as pressure. Leaders of intellectual fashion exert pressure on
government, exert pressure until they get action quite often. Some examples may
make the process clearer. In the 1960's, Ralph Nader wrote a book entitled
*Unsafe at Any Speed.* He charged that American auto makers were turning out
unsafe cars, failing to incorporate features that would save lives, and thus
making auto travel pre carious. In consequence of his charges a campaign to
change all this emerged, laws were passed, and in the course of time various
safety devices became mandatory for all automobiles. The impetus from this and
similar works provoked two much broader campaigns: consumerism in general and
safety requirements by governments in general. Hence, a Federal Office of
Consumer Affairs was authorized, and most states followed suit with their own
offices or bureaus. Also, the federal government set up an Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) which began to promulgate thousands of rules
and restrictions affecting the safety of workers. As for the governmental
intrusion into the automobile business, a newspaper reports that more vehicles
were recalled because of defects in 1977 than were sold in that year.

Some years back, the late Rachel Carson came out with a book entitled *Silent
Spring.* This was the intellectual opening for the environmentalist campaign
which got underway in the late 1960's. Environmentalism swiftly became *the*
fashionable cause, horror stories spread of how we were destroying the
environment with chemicals, threatening the oxygen supply, making the air
poisonous to breathe, the water hazardous to drink, and making our surroundings
desolate.

Protective legislation was, of course, forthcoming, and a new branch of the
bureaucracy was created to see to the well-being of the environment.

Where does this pressure come from? It comes from those who deal in one way or
another with ideas, with opinion making and the spread of ideas, those in the
grip of the idea of transforming man and his universe. They are mostly
intellectuals, or have intellectual pretensions: they are professors, students,
teachers in general, journalists, writers, preachers, publicists, and what have
you. How do they exert the pressure? They do so by the holding of key positions
in the media of communication and by their success in purveying the approved
attitudes. Mere Presidents must be continually wary of them, lest a thoughtless
word will ruin their chances for re-election. Generals who voice unapproved
attitudes are likely to be hounded out of the service, denied promotions, or
buried in some administrative office in the Pentagon. Judges who hope for
promotion must take care that they have never harbored opinions, or at least
spoken or acted upon them, which will bring them to the unfavorable attention of
media spokesmen.

There are numerous examples of what horrendous things can happen to those who
provoke the wrath of media spokesmen, but no more dramatic one has yet occurred
than that of the resignation of President Nixon in the wake of Watergate charges
and revelations.

Ordinarily, however, the power of intellectual fashion directed by those under
the sway of the idea that has the world in its grip is not demonstrated by the
destruction of men in high places. It evinces itself, rather, in the day to day
pressures on politicians and others to take approved positions and advance their
enactments. It makes certain courses of action unthinkable and those that are
approved largely unquestioned. It is a subtle and effective tyranny over
thought. The concentrated power of government is wielded by those who dare not
oppose this intellectual fashion. There are enough victims strewn along the
wayside to serve as cautionary examples for those who consider any other course.

The power of government is wielded both directly and indirectly. We are all
aware, more or less, of how control over our lives is wielded directly. It may
be instructive, then, to examine into one of the prominent indirect ways
government wields power.

*Next: 20. The United States: Business as an Instrument of Political Power.*;

