# World in the Grip of an Idea: 20. The United States: Business as an Instrument
  of Political Power

[Tuesday, August 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/august-1978/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between Ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

Bridles for horses are equipped with blinkers. They are flaps on both sides of
the horse's head at the level of the eye. Horses are skittish animals, and the
purpose of the blinkers is to shut off peripheral vision so that the horse will
not attend to or be startled by something seen out of the corner of the eye.

Modern man is provided with blinkers, too. These are intellectual blinkers
provided by the prevailing ideology. Under the sway of the idea that has the
world in its grip, intellectuals blinker or blind us by determining what are the
issues and in what terms they are to be discussed. Our intellectual vision is
narrowed to take in only what we are supposed to see. True, there are those who
persist in seeing more than is prescribed, but they are usually denied any forum
from which to dramatize their viewpoint.

The prevailing ideology holds that "business," defined as an interest group, is
in a continuing opposition to government intervention and regulation. The
antecedents of this notion are in ideology. Marxist ideology proclaimed that a
class struggle was in progress. The main antagonists in this struggle were the
capitalist class and the proletariat class. Gradualists have watered down this
doctrine considerably, softened it at the edges, and made it less pronounced.
But as they have instituted their reforms and regulations in the United States,
they have clung to a subtle variation of the class struggle notion that
capitalists are the enemy. On this view, businessmen favor *laissez faire* and
oppose government intervention, while government intervenes on behalf of "the
people" to hold obstreperous businessmen in line. These are the terms in which
the issues must be discussed, if intellectual fashion is to be observed.

The Marxist notion that capitalists constitute a class vigorously defending
their interests against all challengers is about as valid as would be the notion
that all females eligible for marriage constitute a class pursuing the common
aim of marriage. The fact is that eligible females are in competition with one
another for the available swains, if matrimony is their object. In their own
way, businessmen are in competition with one another. They compete for
customers, for materials, for workers, and for whatever they conceive would be
advantageous to them. True, some businessmen oppose regulation as a matter of
principle; and a goodly number oppose regulations when it is expedient to do so.
It is also the case that businessmen are more apt to denounce regulation than
are, say, journalists or teachers—regulation of business, that is.

Be that as it may, it is a grotesque distortion of what is happening to look at
the matter this way. There is every reason to believe that businessmen spend
vastly more ingenuity, energy, and money to get regulations construed so as to
be able to live with or take advantage of them than they do in opposition to
intervention. If this were the issue, however, there would be room for it as an
issue in the framework of the prevailing ideology. There has been much
discussion over the years about how the regulated manipulate the regulators.
Those favoring government restraint of business have deplored it, while those
more favorably disposed toward the needs of business activity have been more
charitably inclined toward something they consider inevitable in any case.

## Businesses Collect Taxes

But what is happening most prominently is of a different order. The grip of the
idea is being fastened on America by using business as an instrument of
political power. Much of the force of government power reaches the individual
today indirectly by way of his employer and the other business and financial
institutions with which he is involved.

Some of this instrumentation of business by government for its own ends is well
known and needs only to be alluded to in order to be accepted. Businesses
collect most of the taxes from individuals and pay them into local, state, and
federal treasuries. This has already been discussed in connection with
restrictions on enterprise, but it needs further elaboration in the context of
government use of business to extend political power. Employers collect most
income taxes, both state and Federal, by withholding them from salaries. They
also collect Social Security taxes in the same way. Stores and other retail
outlets collect sales taxes. On budget type mortgages, the mortgage company
collects one twelfth of the projected real estate taxes by way of the regular
monthly payment. Telephone, electric, and *gas* companies add whatever taxes
there may be upon their services: to their bills, and when the bills are paid,
the tax amounts are set aside to be paid into governments. Service stations
collect the taxes on gasoline, tires, and other automobile accessories. There
are also a considerable variety of hidden taxes on businesses which are
generally passed on in the price of the product.

The most extensive of these, though it is not usually referred to as "hidden,"
is the tax on corporations. Businesses collect these taxes, of course, because
they are required by law to do so and would be subject to punishment if they did
not. The collection of them, the keeping of records, and the other costs
associated with it, are generally a cost of doing business. The consumer pays
these costs as well, though it is only fair to observe that he would no doubt
pay them, and they would probably be higher, if government collected the taxes
directly.

However that might be, it should be clear that government has empowered
businesses to perform the bulk of one of its most disagreeable functions—the
collection of taxes. This does not mean that people usually blame businesses for
the taxes, though they are apt to blame them for high prices when, in fact, much
of the price is attributable to taxes. The main impact of this use of business
by government is somewhat more subtle. When business collects the taxes the
individual loses his ability to contest paying them. He can only prevent income
taxes from being withheld by quitting his job. He can only refuse to pay the
*sales* taxes by declining to buy what he wants. The normal route for taking a
case to court is denied him because of the difficulty in refusing to pay. The
individual's economy is intertwined with the power of government over him.

## Enforcement of Labor Laws

Business becomes an instrument of government, too, as the main executor of the
government's labor and employment policies. The individual is the pawn in the
midst of the complex rules by which government activates its policies through
business. Whether he can get a job at all, whether he will have to join a labor
union, how long he will work for how much, among other things, are determined by
government policy.

Wages and hours legislation has been around for forty years now. Government
prescribed minimum wages determine practically whether a person may be employed
or not. If a person is unskilled, handicapped, or slow, he may not be
sufficiently productive to be employed for a job because of the mandatory wage.
The inexperienced are at a particular disadvantage, because a prospective
employer has no way of knowing how long it will take or even whether an
applicant may become productive enough both to earn the minimum wage and repay
the expense of training him.

Union wages and other rules and restrictions are often an extension of
government policy over business. The National Labor Relations Board, an arm of
the federal government, establishes the framework, though it may not be known,
sometimes, in advance of a ruling, within which company union relations are to
be carried on. Once a company recognizes a union, it tends to become an
instrument of union policy—collecting dues, hiring through a union hall,
requiring union membership of those it employs, maintaining seniority rules, and
paying a union wage. The individual is at the mercy of the NLRB, the labor
union, and the company when they act in concert.

Fair employment practices, as they are called, and Affirmative Action are
prescribed by the federal and many state governments. Thus, the hiring and
promotion practices of business become an instrument of government policy. To
avoid litigation or government penalties many firms undertake joint ventures
with minority owned companies, establish what are in effect quota systems in
hiring and promotion, and conduct searches for minority personnel to fill
vacancies. To the extent that political prescription is substituted for business
judgment, a business becomes an instrument of political power.

Many of the regulations, restrictions, and restraints under which we live are
imposed by way of business. For example, automobile safety equipment and
emission controls come by way of requirements on auto makers. Safety belts,
shoulder harnesses, interior design, structural strength, and so on, have made
their appearance not from customer demand but by way of legislation. Buzzers,
filters, and an assortment of other devices are attached to the vehicles by
government fiat. An individual who wishes to have his vehicle divested of any of
this impedimenta must either do it himself or find a wayward mechanic to do it
for him.

## Housing Regulations

Most of the housing available to us has its quality and character determined by
building companies and financial institutions acting as instruments of
government. Most of the financing of homes comes from privately owned
institutions. However, their lending policies are heavily influenced and widely
determined by government policy. VA and FHA guarantees under gird a considerable
portion of the loans made to individuals. Although the money comes from private
sources, VA and FHA lay down standards for and determine much about the houses
so financed. Many savings and loan associations are federally chartered and make
their loans in terms of these government charters. Builders impose, as it were,
the numerous requirements of local, state, and federal government on buyers,
such things as zoning restrictions, setback ordinances, distances of buildings
from property lines, structural standards, sanitation and electrical
prescriptions, the paving of streets, and so on and on. Real estate agents, if
their services are to be used, impose the rules governing them upon their
customers.

Examples could be multiplied of businesses as instruments of government, but
perhaps enough has been told to establish the point. Virtually every business in
America (if there is an exception, it has escaped my notice) acts as an arm of
government in one way or another and to a greater or lesser extent. While the
evidence to substantiate much of this must be familiar to most of us, the
implications and results of it may not be so readily apparent.

The matter is more complex than the above would indicate. The examples thus far
could be interpreted as being simply a case of government imposing rules upon
business which they in turn, however reluctantly, impose on their customers.
Undoubtedly, that is the way it is often enough. But that is hardly the whole
story. *Government and business are so intricately intertwined today* that many
businesses have taken on the character of governments. I would like to back into
an explanation of the how and why of this development with a simple story.

## Banking Policies

Some years back I lived in a state which had a tax, imposed annually, on
checking accounts in banks. This tax came to my attention one day when I was
going over my monthly bank statement. There was a deduction from my account to
pay this tax. This struck me as highly impertinent behavior by the bank. My
understanding of the agreement I had with the bank was that when the spirit
moved me I would deposit money with them. Then, when, as, and if I decided to do
so I could order all or some portion of it to be paid out by writing checks on
the account. They were trustees, so to speak, of such money as I deposited with
them and were only to disburse it on my order. It seemed to me they had violated
that trust by paying out my money without my knowledge or consent.

With that understanding in mind, I placed a call to the highhanded bank in
question. (I am now older and wiser and therefore know in advance the futility
of such calls, although I still make them sometimes just to prove that I am
alive.) When I had finally been connected with someone sufficiently high up in
the bank to deal with so exalted a question, I made inquiries about their
behavior. I was assured that the bank had acted in accord with state law,
something I had never for a moment doubted. But, I asked, has the law been
challenged? He did not know, as best I can recall, nor, so far as I could make
out, care.

My thought was that this manner of taking my money was in violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which prohibits states
to take the property of their citizens without due process of law. Moreover, it
seemed to me that the bank had strong incentives to challenge such a law. After
all, the bank wanted deposits from customers, and one of the best arguments for
using their services was the security they provided for your money. It happened,
too, that the bank was ideally situated to challenge this law, for it could do
so by refusing to pay the tax, an option not available to me. In addition, the
bank probably had a prestigious law firm on retainer to protect its interests,
since this particular bank was one of a large chain spread over the state, there
being no law in that state to prohibit branch banking.

My reasoning was not so much faulty as incomplete. True, banks have the
incentive to reassure and protect their depositors. But I was ignoring something
so basic as that the state government was probably one of the largest depositors
in the bank. Indeed, the likelihood is so great as to amount to virtual
certainty that the tax money taken from mine and other accounts did not even
leave the bank; it was just shifted to the state's account. That, however, might
not have been determinative if it were all that was involved.

I was ignoring the more trenchant fact that banks are creatures of government,
that their very existence by charter depends upon government, that their
privileges arise from the state, and that banks can be harassed, audited, have
their charters revoked, or be closed down. That being the case, banks are about
as likely to take on an adversary relationship to the state over some paltry tax
as an unemployed spinster is to sue her parents with whom she lives over the
lack of variety in her breakfast. Besides, the tax could hardly harm this chain
of banks if all other banks in the states had to collect it too. Laws applied to
a whole industry become merely a condition of doing business.

Is this an indictment of business? No, it is a description of what is happening
in America as the concentrated power of government tightens its grip on people.
The idea that has the world in its grip only permits what is called private
business to exist on sufferance. It can exist only to the extent that it serves
the ends of the idea as determined by those who control or manipulate
government. Businessmen know that as a rule they cannot even survive, much less
prosper, if they adopt an adversary relationship with government. Both
politicians and businessmen sometimes speak as if they were adversaries. No
great harm results. The ideological view of the relationship is affirmed, and
each is given an opportunity to vent his spleen. But beneath the surface
something quite different is going on.

## The Ties that Bind

Business and government are intricately intertwined. Businesses generally depend
upon government for charters, for licenses, for contracts, for subsidies, for
guarantees of foreign investments, for favors for their particular industry, and
so on, and on. Business serves government in the ways that are specified,
becomes an instrument of government, in order to continue to function and,
hopefully, make a profit. Airlines seeking new routes, continued payment for
carrying the mail, and favorable rates are not about to contest the regulations
on smoking that they apply to their passengers. Home builders hoping for some
new government subsidy program to enable them to sell more houses have the
incentive to work with rather than oppose government. Public utility firms
seeking higher rates can hardly afford to object to being tax collectors.
Whether unwillingly or not, business acts as a partner with government in
imposing political power on Americans.

You cannot play with fire without getting burned, of course. The more closely
business becomes intertwined with government, the more like government it
becomes. The object of politics is power. The aim of business is profit. The
method of business is attraction and persuasion. The method of government is
force. As business becomes politicized, it does not forgo its aim of making
profits. What it does do is begin to seek to use the force of government to
increase its profits. Power and profit are linked together as government and
business become intertwined.

## The Energy Crisis

This development may best be illustrated by an example. In the early 1970's a
gasoline shortage occurred. It was a shortage engineered by politicians, of that
there should be no doubt. The governments of several major oil producing
countries declared an embargo and proceeded, thereafter, to raise the price of
oil drastically. The shortage evaporated and was no more, though prices of
gasoline were much higher than before. Nonetheless, American politicians
proclaimed that we were in the midst of an incipient energy crisis. What the
politicians had discovered was something known to economists for at least two
hundred years, and to most other folks considerably longer, namely, that the
sources of energy are *scarce.* Indeed, it is the very *scarcity* of fuel that
makes it costly at all. We shall not, of course, run out of energy—not, that is,
until the sun grows cold or this planet is wrenched away from its favorable
location to the sun—but different sources may have to be tapped to get it.

Nonetheless, having misconstrued permanent scarcity as incipient and worsening
shortage, some politicians went into their "sky is falling" routine, made a
national problem out of it, and began to bring forth programs to solve it. Not
surprisingly, these programs involved various sorts of government intervention.
What may have been surprising, however, was the way in which fuel suppliers
joined into this hue and cry. Full page advertisements began to appear in
newspapers, ads paid for by oil companies, electric power and gas companies, and
such like, urging the conservation of energy and describing the efforts they
were making to deal with the shortage. Power and gas companies began to include
tips on conservation of energy in the envelopes containing their bills. Business
instrumented itself swiftly to political policy.

For years, electric companies had urged their customers to use more and more
electricity. They had extolled the virtues of electric appliances over all
others.

Moreover, they had encouraged greater use by giving customers lower rates as the
amount used increased. Indeed, there did not appear to be anything odd about
this earlier behavior. It was what advertising was for, to encourage use of a
product. It was in keeping with what is economic. There are economies of scale
in production. In the case of electricity, this means that when the investment
in machinery has been made, the more that is produced with it, the less it costs
to produce each unit: In order to sell this electricity, the company would
promote greater use by reducing the rate as more was used.

And then, overnight, as it were, electric power companies stopped advertising
their product and began propagandizing for conservation, adopting the same line
as the government. Utility commissions began to approve what are called
"inverted rate structures." What these rate structures do is penalize heavy
users of electricity, by charging higher rates for greater amounts of
electricity. The model for this rate structure must have been the graduated
income tax.

Why would a power company stand still for such a rate structure? After all, it
still got the advantage of economies of scale whether there was an energy
shortage or not. Moreover, it costs little, if any, more to *get* the
electricity to a home using1500 kilowatts per month, say, than one using 500.
The meter has to be read only once each month regardless of how much electricity
is used. It costs as much to bill the user for 500 as for 5000 kilowatts, and
the same expenses attend processing either account.

There are two answers which help to explain this otherwise strange power company
behavior. One is that the power company was serving the source of its
monopoly—government. The other is that the company was being well served, at
least temporarily, by the utility commission. Undoubtedly, a power company could
be greatly enriched if it could enjoy economies of scale and charge even more
for this electricity than that bought by small scale users.

Most likely, such a policy would, in the long run, be harmful to the power
company, for profits would surely dwindle as use declined. But in the short
run—before those who had all electric homes could convert to other power
sources, before alternative sources of power have been developed, before people
changed their life styles to reduce the consumption of electricity—the companies
should reap a windfall of profits.

Of course, high profits would bring them to the unfavorable attention of utility
commissions who had approved the rates in the first place. Except that some
power companies have already been foresighted enough to forecast a need for a
vast amount of capital to increase production to meet demand. It apparently does
not matter that the demand they are forecasting is based upon a projection of
increases in the past, increases which took place when the use of electricity
was being vigorously advanced by advertising and lower rates for heavy users.
What the present policies will lead to is uncertain. Meanwhile, the intertwining
of government and business has produced some strange uneconomic policies.

## The Customer Loses

The final stage of business as an instrument of government will almost certainly
be that business will be transformed into government, or be so much like it that
we will have a distinction without a difference. The most basic distinction
between business and government is this: Business serves; government commands.
That distinction has been breaking down for years. One way it has broken down is
that government has provided many services itself: education, parks, electric
power, mail delivery, garbage collection, and so forth. The other way is that
many businesses have been granted monopolies and special privileges so that they
become more like governments than businesses.

Government regulation of business is almost always advanced as a way of
restraining or inhibiting business. But it does not necessarily work that way.
Government regulation limits and restrains business in serving customers. If a
business is only permitted to stay open during certain hours that limit its
service to those hours. If rates are regulated, this may appear to limit the
businessman, but it also limits the way in which he can serve. But most
importantly, as the businessman is more closely regulated he shifts from serving
to enforcing the conditions under which he will serve. He comes to resemble the
policeman more than a businessman.

Public utilities are apt to be as inflexible in enforcing their rules as any
government. The telephone installer will not install the telephone unless the
householder is at home. The utilities will not begin service, ordinarily, until
the person wishing to be served has made his way to their offices, put up a
deposit, provided whatever information they require, and otherwise satisfied
them that he is responsible. Hospitals are notoriously rule ridden places, and
many a nurse appears to be a frustrated prison matron. (It should be noted in
this connection that hospitals are generally heavily subsidized by government
and are coming under ever more strenuous regulation and controls.)

## From Service to Compulsion

Every organization must have internal discipline over its employees, of course.
That is not at issue here. What is at issue is the shift of business from
service to compulsion. It is, no doubt, a natural tendency of those who live
under rules to shift the weight of the rules from themselves toward those whom
they are supposed to serve. There is a corrective to that in the open market
under competition. The customer does not like to be ordered around, and he goes
elsewhere. He gives his business to those who wish to serve him rather than
command him. Any rules that he perceives that apply to him had best be kept to
the minimum and be unobtrusive.

When government steps in, that changes. So long as the rule applies to all in
the industry, competition is no longer a factor in whatever is involved. The
business no longer has to serve in that particular way; it needs only to do
whatever the law requires. When rates are regulated, the business need no longer
compete in that way. If some of the rates are not particularly profitable, those
in the industry will discourage that particular custom, providing only the bare
minimum of service that the law allows. Indeed, the burden of obtaining the
service is often shifted to the customer. For example, when long term interest
rates for home buyers has been set below the market rate, the borrower usually
has had to pay for the loan by what are called "points" and other advance
charges. In addition to that, the conditions to be met in order to obtain the
loan are usually quite exacting. Long waits for loan approval are common. The
lender is not gladly serving; he is emphasizing the commanding position he
occupies.

Evolutionary socialism advances gradually and step by step in America. The
inroads are usually made under the guise of controlling, regulating, and taxing
business and the sources of capital. On the surface, this does indeed occur. But
beneath the surface government and business become intertwined. Business becomes
an instrument of government, willing or not. Business becomes politicized.
Business begins to serve its master, government, instead of or in addition to
the consumer. Business begins, unwittingly perhaps, to adopt the posture of
compulsion rather than of service.

According to the lore of our time there is a public sector and a private sector
in the economy. But where is the private sector? Does it consist of privately
owned companies such as those of the auto makers? What is private about
mandatory seat belts and shoulder harness? What is private about mandatory
emission controls? What is private about being forced by government to recall
millions of automobiles annually to replace parts? What is private about having
to pay union wages and submit to union requirements reinforced by the National
Labor Relations Board? Rather than referring to this as the private sector, it
would be accurate to refer to it as the politicized sector of the economy. But
which "sector" is not? Some are more, some are less, but all are being
politicized.

## The Political Framework

The deeper significance of this development needs to be clearly understood. To
understand it, it is necessary to see it in terms of the appropriate theory.
Much has been written about the impact of intervention in terms of economic
theory. This is enlightening and informative. But when business becomes an
instrument of government, economics becomes secondary, for the framework and the
determinative element is no longer economic. It is political, and political
theory must provide the framework from which it is to be understood.

Political theory has to do with how effectively to govern and how government may
be restrained and limited. The greatest work on political theory in the United
States was *The Federalist.* It was written as an exposition and defense of the
Constitution of the United States and, more specifically, to urge its
ratification. The great principles set forth there are those of
constitutionalism, of representative government, of the dispersion of power in a
federal system, of the separation of powers into three branches—all of which
they argued would provide an energetic and strong but limited government.

The reason for limiting government was clear to the Founders of these United
States. Government is dangerous. It differs from other organizations in that it
has the power and authority to use sanctions. In a word, it is empowered legally
to use force. Unlimited government means unlimited use of force. In practice it
means that all institutions and organizations are permeated by force. The end
result is tyranny.

No better prescription for tyranny could be written than to make business an
instrument of government. Every businessman and every employee of businessmen
becomes a servant of government. Every consumer, each one of us, is at the mercy
of politicized business. The usual argument against intervention is that it is
harmful economic restraint of goods and services business can and would provide.
There is a more telling argument. It is that government control over business is
inevitably government control over consumers, and the instrument of that control
is business.

*Next: 21. The United States: The Thrust to Transformation*

