# World in the Grip of an Idea 22.: The United States: A Bemused People

[Sunday, October 1, 1978](https://fee.org/the-freeman/october-1978/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

There is a public service advertisement that appears on television from time to
time. One scenario has everyone in it moving around in wheel chairs except one
person who walks about normally. Everything is arranged for the convenience of
people in wheel chairs, which poses dangers and inconveniences for anyone afoot.
In the other scenario, everyone is blind except one person. He opens a book but
sees no words in it. He asks if there are any books with words in them in the
library. They assure him that the books they are using have words in them. Since
the person who can see cannot read in Braille, the others assume he cannot read.

The point of the advertisement is, in part at least, to arouse sympathy and
understanding for the handicapped. So far as that is its purpose, there is
nothing exceptional about it. To sympathize with and have concern for the less
fortunate is in keeping with the highest concept of charity. Moreover, to put
oneself in the place of others, by way of the imagination, is laudable.

However, the method used to do this in the advertisement is questionable. The
method entails a reversal of the norms. The handicapped, because of their
implicit normality, have changed from being subjects worthy of sympathy and
concern into threats to those who have been normal. What is convenient to their
condition becomes the way things are to be arranged. This emerges as a threat
because the people who have been handicapped show no sympathy or understanding
for erstwhile normal people.

## Reversing Normality

The transformation that has been going on in the United States proceeds by
reversing normality. In effect, new norms are created, and the old established
norms are abandoned. This change is impelled by the idea that has the world in
its grip. Just as in the above scenario, what was normal becomes exceptional and
unusual, or, at least, not distinctively normal. What was formerly rare or
unusual takes its place among the expected and normal.

The process by which this transformation occurs should be familiar, for the
pattern has been established by constant repetition and by expansive application
into more and more areas. The change is advanced by relativistic arguments. In
its bluntest formulation the argument goes something like this. What is normal?
Who can say what is normal? At the ordinary level of discourse, these are
unanswerable questions. They are difficult to answer, in the first place,
because we are unprepared to defend our concepts of normality. We may be
convinced that we know what is normal, but proof is quite another matter.

There is good reason for this. Inquisitive children usually learn at a fairly
early age that questioning the norms is a fruitless and unrewarding undertaking.
Far from being commended for being brilliant, they are apt to be maligned for
their stupidity. After all, what kinds of questions can be raised about norms?
Why do we walk on our feet instead of our hands? Why do we drive on the right
instead of the left? Why do women have babies and men have hair on their chests?
In most cases, no satisfactory answers can be given. Hence, children are
discouraged from raising such questions. The best answer we can make in many
cases is simply, "That is just the way things are." And what we are apt to think
after saying it a few times is: "If you weren't so stupid, you would have
figured it out for yourself."

There is yet another reason for our usual inability to make an apology for our
norms. One of the primary concerns of society is to maintain the norms. All
social function depends upon norms and their general acceptance. Take them away,
or abandon them, and society disintegrates. All acts lose their meaning, and
everything is unexpected and strange. To debate the validity of norms is to
debate the validity of society. That is, of necessity, a debate for which there
are no rules, and one which society cannot tolerate. Society's business is to
discover, preserve, and maintain the norms, not to challenge them.

That is not to say that norms are not well grounded. On the contrary, many of
them are grounded in nature. Where that is not the case—where they arose as
custom, for example—they have been instilled by nurture and have become second
nature by usage and veneration. Our very social existence is grounded in norms.
Their reason for being, if there is no other reason, is the smooth functioning
of society. It is a sound instinct that resists discarding a norm because we do
not perceive its reason for being, for experience teaches that if we probe deep
enough we may discover reasons we did not even suspect.

None of this is acceptable to socialists, of course. The received norms stand
athwart the path which both revolutionary and evolutionary socialism must tread.
Socialism requires that all efforts be concerted toward the achievement of human
felicity on this earth. The great strength of the idea that has the world in its
grip lies in that very conception. Its weakness lies in the conception, too, as
well as elsewhere. The irony of it is that the achievement of human felicity, so
far as is practicable, is a social norm. More, the purpose of society is to
provide the framework for achieving such felicity as is possible for man. But
society does not define human felicity. That is left, in the main, to individual
decision. In the same manner, individuals are left to a great variety of devices
and means for achieving their own ends. This is anathema to socialists. They
would transform society from a framework into the determinant of the content of
felicity and the means by which it would be achieved. The individual would be
confined and society politicized. Social norms would become whatever appeared to
be useful in controlling the individual and politicizing society. Norms have to
become what is decreed as normal by the political power. Gradualists, however,
have no such absolute power as yet. In the United States, the communications
industry has made forceful strides in determining what is normal.

## Breaking Down Distinctions

The first stages of socialism are concerned mainly with breaking down the
distinctions on which the norms are based. The breakdown of the norms proceeds
along two lines. One is intellectual, and the mode is relativism. The tendency
of relativism is to discredit all norms. Norms are, according to this line,
simply matters of opinion. The authority for them becomes either majority
opinion or simply whatever is done by large numbers of people. Normality in
America has become indistinguishable from the average, or better still, the
lowest common denominator of behavior. The logic of such an approach is that if
norms are relative there are no norms. There is only what happens to prevail at
the moment.

The other line is to pose continual challenges to the established norms.
Journalism is particularly well suited to this undertaking. There is an old saw
to the effect that if a dog bites a man that is not news, but if a man bites a
dog that is news. That is a way of saying that journalists focus on the odd,
strange, curious, different, and unusual. But when journalism becomes pervasive,
as it bids to do in America today, it becomes a continual assault on the norms.
This is especially the case when the odd, strange, and curious are not presented
as odd, strange, and curious but as commonplace and normal. It happens over and
over again that radicals are interviewed in such a way as to make them appear
normal.

The technique by which this is done is easy enough to discern. Let us suppose
that an advocate of communal living arrangements is being interviewed. The act
is cleaned up for television, for instance. There is no obscenity or profanity.
The interviewee is likely to be well enough dressed, be clean, well brushed, and
reasonably neat. The impression prevails that he is different in one respect
only—that is, that he believes the "nuclear family" is outmoded and new and
extended families are emerging. New norms are taking shape before our eyes, as
it were, painlessly and with no apparent wrench to a whole body of belief and
practice. The odd, strange, and curious—the shifting and unsettled relationships
in some sort of communal arrangement—are presented as an emerging norm.

## Individuality Assaulted

Why is this assault on the norms made necessary by the idea that has the world
in its grip? The reason is not difficult to grasp. There is one norm that must
be wiped out if the idea is to prevail. It is the norm that individuals can, do,
and will pursue their self-interest as they perceive it, ordinarily and
generally. The pursuit of self-interest is the apple of discord in the socialist
visionary Garden of Eden. It is the unpardonable sin, the source of man's fall,
and the continuing obstacle to harmony and beatitude on this planet. So long as
it remains normal, the vision of socialism is only a will-of-the-wisp.

On the face of it, the socialist problem would be easy enough to solve. All that
would have to be done would be to get people to abandon the individual pursuit
of self-interest and devote themselves to the common good. Isolate
self-interest, pillory it, make it unacceptable, and people will abandon it.
There have been attempts to do this, of course. But the solution is not that
easy. Self-interest is not a norm existing in splendid isolation from all other
norms. Instead, it is intertwined in the warp and woof of the whole fabric of
the received normality. Socialists have generally understood this well enough
and have grasped at least some of the dimensions of the problem confronting
them.

The whole system of private property buttresses and supports—even rewards—the
pursuit of self-interest by individuals. Free enterprise invites individuals to
prosper by laboring to advance themselves. The norm that a man should receive
the fruits of his labor places a premium on the pursuit of self-interest. The
family is an enclave of self-interest or at least limited interest seeking.
Members of the family are bidden to look after the family interest primarily.
The institution of private property is so developed and conceived that it is
tied up with the limited family interest—with inheritance, with wills, with
shares for members of the family, and so on.

Even religion has been generally entangled with individual self-interest.
(Indeed, Marx believed that organized religion was at the apex of the whole
structure of capitalism.) The individual is bidden to take care of his interest
in eternal beatitude in the hereafter by getting right with his Maker. The Hope
of Heaven is, after all, a Hope primarily for individual salvation.

On the socialist view, then, the received norms are honeycombed with supports
for and enticements to the individual to pursue his own self-interest. The
pursuit of self-interest is a norm, as they see it, because the whole fabric of
normality makes it appear to be so. In order to cut away the pursuit of
self-interest, the whole structure of normality must be replaced. Those under
the sway of the idea differ about means and, perhaps, about how drastic the
surgery must be, but they basically agree over the problems presented by the
received norms.

## A Political Movement to Effect Economic Change

There have been two major thrusts of socialism in the United States in the
twentieth century, with many more smaller and interrelated developments. The
first thrust evinced itself primarily as a political movement aimed at bringing
about economic changes. This political thrust has gained momentum several times,
but it was most successful in making headway in the 1930s. Roosevelt's New Deal
succeeded in passing legislation which seriously altered the framework of
economic normality and morality.

The use of government power to redistribute the wealth was established as a
principle during the decade of the 1930s. The Social Security enactment turned
out to be the centerpiece of the distributionist legislation. By means of it
money was taxed from earners and distributed after retirement to those who had
paid into it. It was, and is, redistributionist because benefits do not depend
upon amount paid in; they are determined by Congress according to formulas which
have been revised over the years.

Redistribution was also the operative principle in many other New Deal programs.
The farm subsidy programs redistributed wealth. The government put its weight
behind labor unions, and hence the use of coercion by unions to get higher wages
and shorter hours. Subsidized houses and government supported loans were also
redistributionist in character. The graduated income tax which, along with
Social Security, under girds redistribution had already been used, but it was
much extended under the New Deal. New distributionist programs have been enacted
over the years. The most notable, and notorious, have been the welfare programs.
Less well publicized, but more ubiquitous, are the numerous subsidies to
everything from airports to local police to school lunch programs. The Federal
hand is not only in every pocket but the Federal handout is extended in every
direction.

## Monetary and Spending Policies to Achieve Control

That government power should be used to control and direct the economy was also
established as a principle in the 1930s. Manipulation of the money supply was
one of the earliest and main instruments of this control. Another major
instrument is government spending and it is linked with taxation to direct
economic action. Government has so long concerned itself with employment and
unemployment that for most people it must appear as legitimate a government
function as is the apprehending and punishing of criminals. All these ways of
controlling and directing the economy have been steadily expanded and extended
since that time.

The other major thrust to socialism came in the 1960s and has continued apace
since. Although it, too, is political, the primary aim is not so much economic
as social. This thrust is toward social transformation. It emerges as an effort
to overturn the established norms as a means of changing the existing order.
Legislation is mainly a framework only for this transformation.

Every norm is grist for the mill in this transformation. Indeed, it is not
clear, in general, that overturning one norm is more important than another.
Since all norms support the existing order, they must all be overturned or
transformed. It hardly matters whether what is involved is sex, marriage, the
family, the role and position of the husband, education, military authority, the
authority of the President, ownership and control over property, or whatever.
Every norm overturned weakens the authority of all norms.

In this sense, priority for destruction of norms may best be given to those most
deeply entrenched. It is from this angle that the assault on sexual norms may be
understood. Sexual norms have been long established, and would appear to be most
difficult to alter. Indeed, many of the sexual norms are rooted in nature, and
some of them have been surrounded by taboos. It is also the case that some of
the most fundamental inequalities are sex related. It is reasonable to suppose
that if the sexual norms could be destroyed, all other norms might fall in their
wake.

The attack on sexual norms has been blatant in recent years. Male dominance and
authority have been under consistent assault. The norm has been that the male is
dominant in male-female relationships—that his opinion is deferred to, his
decision final, and that he is the fiscally responsible partner in the
household. This norm is supported by custom and tradition, and has been
supported by religious authority. A portion, at least, of this norm has a
natural basis. Normally, men are taller, heavier, and stronger than women. Women
are the child-bearers by nature, and many of the skills and abilities which they
have developed have been related to that role. The nuclear family, as monogamous
marriage has been lately dubbed, is founded in the nature of parental
responsibility, and-the desirable conditions of child bearing. The norms are
threatened by what is called female liberation. Aggressive homosexuality
threatens the whole concept of normality. If homosexuality is "normal" there are
no norms in sexual relationships. The male dominance takes on only a symbolic,
and entirely relative, significance. Parental responsibility has no foundation
in homosexuality. The distinction between male and female is obliterated. Normal
is cut loose from its foundation in nature. The whole framework of norms
entailed in marriage, the family, property inheritance, loses its meaning when
homosexuality is accepted as normal.

## The Impact on Society: A Chaos of Relationships

The reversal of the norms has a devastating impact on society. Norms are to
society what the fixed points of a compass are to navigation. It can be argued
that norms are relative, that some of them are even arbitrary, which they may
be. In a similar fashion, it can be argued that the directions on a compass are
relative, as indeed they are in some senses. But it is absolutely essential to
agree upon and accept them else charts become worthless, and no definite course
can be plotted to go from one place to another. The functioning of society is
equally dependent upon agreement upon and acceptance of a set of norms. Norms
are the foundation of privileges, positions and functions within a society. When
they are overturned, a chaos of relationships results. No one can any longer be
sure what function he is to perform, or who has the right or authority to make
any decision or perform any act.

Every body must have a head. Every household must have a head. Every undertaking
involving two or more people must have someone who is in charge. Constructive
activity depends upon each person knowing what he is to do. When the norms are
overturned, constructive activity declines and debates and contests over
authority ensue. Force tends to replace voluntary cooperation, and the strongest
or most determined assert what is often enough entirely arbitrary authority.

That is what is happening in large in the United States. The norms may not have
been overturned in many instances, but they have been so seriously questioned
that their validity is in doubt, and there is no longer universal agreement upon
and acceptance of them. Those who insist upon traditional male-female roles are
denounced as "male chauvinist pigs." Those who are affronted by open
homosexuality are accused of being intolerant. Those who exercise firmly the
authority of their positions are charged with being dictatorial. Students would
determine the content of their courses and formally evaluate their teachers.
Prison inmates attempt to organize politically in order to run the prisons.
Unions negotiate and enforce work rules.

What a man may do with and on his property is in such doubt that experts must be
called upon to set matters right. The courts are burdened down with litigation
as civil suits burgeon. Court cases are increasing in length and complexity, and
no decision ever seems final as appeal follows upon appeal from whatever
decision has been rendered. Interminable hearings precede all sorts of
undertakings. Debates and contests over who has the right and authority to do
what supersede the constructive activity by which it might be accomplished.

## Rampant Confusion

The American people are bemused. The word has two rather distinct meanings. It
means "confused, muddled, stupefied" and it means "lost in thought" or
"preoccupied." Americans have every reason to be confused. They have been
repeatedly confronted and affronted by scandalous behavior that has gone
unreproached. They have witnessed in a span of little more than a decade the
breakdown of social restraints as in the case of the public use of profanity and
obscenities. They have seen the breakdown of the proprieties as they apply to
female behavior. On the day before four students were shot down by the National
Guard at Kent State, teen-age girls roamed the campus making lascivious
invitations to the guardsmen, shouting unprintable obscenities at them, and
otherwise behaving like tramps. People have witnessed the loosening of all sorts
of restraints and have felt powerless to do anything about it. The symbols of
political authority—the military and the police—have been defied with impunity
and subjected to verbal and physical assault. Why would not people be confused?

And, whether lost in thought or not, the American people have been preoccupied.
Better, they have increasingly occupied themselves with their own affairs and
closed their eyes to what is going on with society. It is understandable that
they should. The disintegration of society means that the individual can no
longer rely on support in bringing reproach and discredit on those who flout the
norms and proclaim their disdain for social prescription. The disintegration of
society means, too, that the individual had best look to his own protection and
well-being. But it also means that force will be brought to bear in more and
more areas of life. The breakdown of authority is not the prelude to liberation,
it is rather the precondition of the restoration of some sort of authority by
the exercise of force.

## Force Fills the Vacuum

Today, that force evinces itself as government intruding ever more deeply into
our lives. It manifests itself as the loss of control over our own affairs to
those who hold the reins of political power. The New Deal type intervention has
continued apace in conjunction with the assault on the norms. But in those areas
where society is impotent, government is just about equally impotent. Thus, the
authority of government declines even as society disintegrates.

The idea that has the world in its grip would replace the pursuit of
self-interest by a pursuit of the common good. There is no evidence that this
has resulted as yet. True, politicians and spokesmen in the communications
industry speak a rhetoric of the common good. But the most obvious development
thus far has been the disintegration of society and the decay of civilized
behavior—the very instruments of the promotion of the common good. There is much
verbal evidence that the American people have lost confidence in government as
an instrument of the general welfare and for the promotion of the common good.
But in their bemused state, they do not readily grasp or believe in an effective
alternative.

Of course, the United States does not exist in a vacuum. The hold of the idea
upon America is an integral part of its hold on the people and governments of
the world. It is appropriate now to turn to an examination of it in that
perspective.

*Next: 23. The Cold War: Revolutionary versus Evolutionary Socialism.*

