# World in the Grip of an Idea: 25. The Cold War: Terrorizing Many Lands

[Monday, January 1, 1979](https://fee.org/the-freeman/january-1979/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between Ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the Ideas and practices around the world.*

The spread of communism around the world is preceded and accompanied by the
spread of terror. Even that way of saying it does not put it as directly as it
can be stated. The spread of communism *is* the spread of terror.

Terror is not incidental to communism; it is essential and organic. Indeed,
terror is the *modus operandi* of revolutionary socialism. Those who will to
believe in the possibilities of the revolution of our age hope that it is
incidental. Apologists for communism—and they are legion—attempt to make it
appear incidental. Terror was justified, they will say, because of the terror of
the regime against which it was used. The terror of a communist regime arises
from the history of brutal governments which have beset particular peoples in
their past. Terror is made necessary by the recalcitrance of the opposition.
Tales of the terror are either fabricated or greatly exaggerated by those who
hate the new regime. (This, they said, of the White Russians, of the Nationalist
Chinese, of Cuban emigrants, and so on.) But, above all, apologists for
communism make the terror appear incidental by treating it as isolated incidents
rather than the patterned behavior that emerges when it is surveyed whole.

## Two Faces of Communism

They are assisted in this by communist regimes. Communism is
Janus-faced—two-faced—as was suggested earlier in this work. One face may well
be called the Ceremonial Face, the carefully conceived and made-up face
presented to the world. It is the face that bespeaks regular government,
democratic elections, government provided free schools, free medical care,
subsidized culture, and so on. It is the face presented by carefully engineered
tours for foreign visitors. It is the face of parliaments, written
constitutions, cultural achievements, housing projects, prosperous collective
farms, of orderly crowds, and contented people. It is the face of justice sought
and on the way to being attained, the face which draws recruits from among
intellectuals around the world. All these things comprise the facade of
communism.

The other face is concealed, or partially concealed, most of the time. It is the
Face of Terror, a terror which outruns the imagination in conceiving it and
before which many prefer to avert their eyes. Whittaker Chambers suggested that
it is a terror the like of which the world had never experienced.

Other ages have known a terror equal to, or a little more than equal to, their
powers to endure it.... Other ages have known a frightfulness equal to their
imagination in inflicting or enduring it. Ours is the first age in which the
havoc that men wreak on men has outrun the imagination, which can no longer cope
with the plain reality and turns away, helpless, exhausted, and incredulous. . .
. Ours is the first age in history in which duly constituted governments, duly
recognized by others calling themselves civilized, practise the extermination of
their own people by millions, as a matter of calculated policy. Within [our]
lifetime ... , the Soviet government … exterminated so many of its people that
it did not dare publish the census figures.... The same government decreed,
because its peasants were hiding their grain, that they should be starved to
death. So they were, from three to six million of them.[^25_1]

That, however, was but one of the cores of the terror stalking the earth.

## Terror Undergirds Power

Terror, I say, is essential to communism. It is essential both to the gaining
and exercising of power by communists. Communism is a power theory, and
undergirding that power is terror. It is not simply that communism entails rule
by a tiny minority. All rule, excepting that in a direct democracy, perhaps, is
rule over the majority by a minority. But communism lacks accepted sanctions for
its rule. Its basic theory denies validity to government and thereby any
sanction for the exercise of its authority or use of force. Its thrust to
transformation pits it against the populace at large; they could only sanction
it by willing their own destruction. Its sanction is only that it rules, and it
rules by terror.

It may be feasible to divide the terror that stalks the earth in the wake of the
spread of communism into four stages. It may be, that is, because our knowledge
of communism in action is still fragmentary. Much communist activity is
clandestine and secret. As yet, no entrenched communist power has fallen so that
its secrets might have come into the hands of a conqueror. (Such as did so many
of those of the Nazis, for example.) Thus, we rely on the reports of defectors,
immigrants, counter-espionage, revelations (such as those made by Khrushchev
about Stalin's rule), deductions from official pronouncements and documents, and
surmise, for our knowledge of the inner workings and plans of communists.

## No Precise Formula

The evidence certainly points to the fact that much of the terror is planned and
coordinated. Yet there are gaps in our knowledge as to whether or not it is done
according to some overall plan. Moreover, there is often no way to determine
which acts of terror associated with the international spread of communism are a
part of a plan and which are the result of local initiative, which are by
communists and which not, or whether the motives of those who commit the acts
are the same as those who order or approve of them. In short, if there is a
"science" of communist terrorism, it has not become public knowledge.

Even so, a pattern of terror can be discerned from the history of communism.
That it was a universal pattern did not begin to become clear until the 1950s
and 1960s. Prior to World War II communism in power had occurred only in the
Soviet Union. The Communist International, the instrument for the spread of
communism, was controlled by the Kremlin leaders. Hence, the pattern was the
Soviet pattern, not necessarily the communist pattern. But with the emergence of
other communist powers, the pattern has been much the same, pointing toward the
conclusion that it is a communist pattern. This does not mean that the use of
terror falls into a rigid and unvarying configuration. On the contrary, all
sorts of variations occur in it. It is rather that if it be assumed that terror
is organic to communism, that it serves certain broad and general purposes, then
the general pattern is discernible.

At any rate, there is a discernible pattern of at least four stages of the
terror. They frequently overlap one another, and excepting for the second stage
there is no predicting in advance how or when they will occur.

## The Disordering Terror

The first stage of the terror may well be called The Disordering Terror. It
encompasses all that terror which precedes the seizure of power by the
communists. It may last for months, for years, for decades, or for as long as it
takes to bring communism to power in a given land.

It is disordering because the general object—as distinct from the particular
object of any act—is to create the conditions of disorder which will be
favorable for communists to seize power. Marx taught that the conditions would
be right for revolution when capitalism had reached the stage of development in
which the lot of the workers became intolerable. It followed that revolution
would come first in what were then the most advanced countries. Lenin altered
this doctrine by demonstrating that the conditions were right for revolution
when disorder had proceeded to the disintegrating point. Hitler's seizure of
power demonstrated the same point, as did that of Mussolini. Communism spreads
by bringing about conditions of disorder. Terror is the most direct means of
producing confusion, arousing fear and distrust, and challenging the ruling
government.

Specific dramatic examples may best illustrate this stage of the terror. Take
the case of Vietnam. The Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam) was organized as an
independent country in 1954. There were communists in South Vietnam, of course,
as there were throughout Indochina. At first, they went underground, but they
soon began to be heard of by assassinations and became known as the Viet Cong
(Vietnamese Communists). "Between 1957 and 1959 the Viet Cong killed sixty-five
village chiefs who had tried to resist Communist pressures." In 1959 radio Hanoi
(the voice of the Communist government in North Vietnam) proclaimed the
desirability of destroying the Diem regime in South Vietnam. In 1960, the
National Liberation Front was organized at the instance of the Communist party
of North Vietnam. In "1960 and 1961 village officials, schoolteachers, and
health workers were being murdered by the thousands. In 1960, through
harassment, plus the murder of teachers and sabotage of buildings, the Viet Cong
succeeded in closing two hundred primary schools in South Vietnam, interrupting
the education of more than twenty-five thousand students. And this is when the
terror was just beginning to explode with full force, warning of horrors to
come."[^25_2]

There is not space here to detail the story of the terror that eventually
engulfed South Vietnam and sent shocks outward into much of the rest of the
world. Those who will to do so may at least know the outcome of it. South
Vietnam is now in the grip of a communist regime, as is much of the rest of
Indochina. Terror prepared the way.

## The Story in Angola

An even more dramatic use of terror occurred in Angola. From March 14-16, 1961,
the northern portion of that large Portuguese colony was ravaged by Bakonga
tribesmen from within Angola aided by their kinsmen from the Congo. These
concerted assaults were organized in cold blood by Holden Roberto, among others,
and fomented by Algerian, Soviet, and Chinese Communists. They were carried out,
with a ferocity that can hardly be imagined, by drunken and drugged savages. All
the inhabitants of whole villages—men, women, children, black and white—were
murdered, the women repeatedly raped, even infants in cribs dismembered, and
many people disemboweled. At one village where there was a sawmill, the victims,
both dead and alive, were lashed to boards and run through the saw lengthwise.

Most of the tales by eyewitnesses are too full of horrible things to repeat.
Here, however, is a snippet from what happened in the village of Fazenda:

> Then the turn came for the women and the children. The beasts made no color
> discrimination. They slaughtered white, mulatto and Negro alike. They would
> throw the smaller children high into the air, let them drop on the soil to
> break their bones and then ... would play a brutal game of football with the
> bodies of those dying children, while the poor mothers screamed like crazy in
> the hands of the beasts. I didn't believe that anything so evil could exist in
> the world.[^25_3]

The object of this concerted terrorism was to paralyze the will of the
Portuguese and drive them from Angola. Had it succeeded then, it would have
brought into power men under the sway of communism.

It would be a mistake, however, to conclude from these two dramatic examples
that The Disordering Terror is usually concerted or concentrated so as to
accomplish such comprehensive objects. More commonly, the terror which precedes
communist takeovers is sporadic, isolated and episodic, rises to a crescendo and
subsides, getting nowhere as far as can be determined at the time. Even that it
is going to lead to a communist take-over is a matter of communist faith until
it happens. Its immediate object may be much more restricted than that, and
frequently is.

Some of the terror may not be planned or directed by communists. Yet, whether it
is or not, it becomes grist for the mills of communists. There are at least two
general ways this may come about. One of these is where apparently free lance
acts of terrorism become a part of the disordering atmosphere which communists
can utilize for their purposes. An example would be the terrorist acts by
anarchists in the last decades of Czarist Russia. There were many such terrorist
acts in the last decade or so of Czarist rule, usually the assassination or
attempted assassination of government officials. Most of these were not
coordinated or directed so far as is known. But they helped to create the
atmosphere of fear and paralysis which enabled the Bolsheviks to bring off a
revolution.

## Terrorizing Presidents

A more familiar case, one much closer home both in place and time, was what we
may call the terrorizing of Presidents of the United States from 1963 to 1973.
It began with the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 and subsided with
the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam. It encompassed the
assassinations of John F. and Robert Kennedy, Martin Luther King, the wounding
and crippling of George Wallace, and, as an epilogue, the two assassination
attempts on President Ford.

So far as we know none of this maiming or killing was directed by any communist
or revolutionary organization. True, the assassins of the Kennedy brothers were
Marxists or communists of some stripe. But no evidence has been forthcoming that
they were ordered to assassinate anyone. Indeed, the only assassin, or would-be
assassin, with an ongoing revolutionary organizational connection was the
would-be assassin of President Ford, a member of the Manson "Family." It is
relevant to point out, however, that revolutionary socialism creates a framework
both for organizational terror and for individual acts of terror. The preaching
of class hatred and allegations of injustice arouse individuals to act on their
own and inspire the formation of "free lance" terrorist organizations such as
the Manson "Family" and the Symbionese Liberation Army.

At any rate, there was a framework for the terrorizing of Presidents provided by
the spread of communism. The American participation in the Vietnamese War was
the most obvious part of the framework. More broadly, there was the spread of
communism into southeast Asia, Latin America, and Africa. This, plus the fact
that the United States was providing just about the only opposition by any
outside nation to the spread of communism.

## Mao's Cultural Revolution

The Cultural Revolution in Communist China during these years was also an
important part of the context. That revolution spread especially to Germany,
France, and the United States, where it was the model for the Youth Rebellion.
The Youth Rebellion was not only inspirited by Mao's Cultural Revolution
spearheaded by students but also by "mind expanding" drugs, psychedelic lights,
hard rock music, sexual promiscuity, and hippie lifestyles. Simultaneous with
these developments was widespread rioting in the cities, mainly by blacks.

A great many people were terrorized during the turbulent sixties. At the gentler
level, there was the terror felt by older people as young people began to crop
up in revolutionary clothing, the men sporting Castro-like beards, and girls
shedding their femininity by wearing field jackets and dungarees. The sudden
change was too swift to be digested; it had the odor of revolution about it,
something much more than just a fad. Parents of youth were filled with dread
that their children were taking drugs, their daughters might run away from home,
their lifestyles cut them off from their elders.

As demonstrations became the order of the day, many people were harassed and
intimidated by them. Riots in numerous cities brought terror to shopkeepers,
peaceful citizens, and policemen. Indeed, policemen along with anyone who
represented authority were especial targets for terrorization. Deans of
colleges, an especially benign breed inhabiting academia, were singled out for a
while by their student charges to bear the brunt of terroristic acts.

## Withdrawal from Vietnam

What brought all these things into focus as a disordering terror in the service
of the spread of communism, so far as they were, was the effort to secure
American withdrawal from Vietnam. It was this, too, that led to the terrorizing
of Presidents. There is no mystery about why that should have been the case.
American involvement in Vietnam was an undeclared war. A succession of
Presidents—Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon—took the initiative in dispatching
American armed forces and conducting the war. Johnson took the initiative in the
heaviest commitment of American forces, and for the last three years of his
presidency he became virtually the whole focus of discontent with the war.

Johnson was terrorized. He was subjected to such vituperation as to surpass
anything that had happened before. Demonstrators descended upon Washington
periodically, picketing the White House, screaming epithets, carrying Viet Cong
flags, quoting Mao, emulating Castro, proclaiming their affection for Ho Chi
Minh, and yelling unprintable obscenities. Some civil rights leaders joined in
the clamor against the war in Vietnam. Following the triumph of Eugene
McCarthy—a "dove" on Vietnam, as those who wanted to wind down the war and
withdraw were called—in the New Hampshire primary, President Johnson announced
that he would not be a candidate for re-election. After the assassination of
Senator Kennedy, the President was increasingly cautious about making public
appearances. When the forces opposed to Vietnam descended upon the Democratic
Convention in Chicago, Johnson declined even to attend a birthday dinner given
in his honor. A President had been terrorized.

The pressure was kept up during the early Nixon years. It would mount to a
crescendo following the bombing of Cambodia. How far Nixon yielded to the
terrorization is uncertain. At any rate, the siege of disordering terror
achieved this much. American forces were withdrawn from Vietnam. Communists came
to power there and in surrounding countries. It was a settled mood in many
quarters that there should be no more Vietnams. The role of the ROTC in colleges
and universities was greatly reduced as a result of student pressures. The draft
was suspended. Communist guerrillas continued their incursions in Africa and
Latin America, and as this is being written are threatening Rhodesia, Nicaragua,
and Iran, among other countries. The revolution did not follow upon that
disordering terror in the United States, though communism spread elsewhere, but
the softening up succeeded here.

## Provocative Actions

The other kind of terror that is not entirely planned by communists but is
utilized by them for spreading their ideology is terror they have provoked.
Provoked terror from the other side is most useful for propaganda purposes and
the swaying of public opinion. It creates confusion in people's minds, making it
difficult to decide who is right and who is wrong. The man who became known to
the world as Joseph Stalin enunciated the principle, or a part of it, after he
had helped to stage a mass demonstration in 1901. In the course of the
demonstration, the demonstrators were fired upon by the police. Stalin drew
these conclusions: "The whips play on the backs of all, irrespective of sex, age
and even class. Thereby the whip lash is rendering us a great service, for it is
hastening the revolutionizing of the `curious onlookers.' It is being
transformed from an instrument for taming into an instrument for rousing the
people.... Every militant who falls in the struggle or is torn out of our ranks
arouses hundreds of new fighters."[^25_4]

Stalin described the technique as one to gain new recruits for the cause, but as
it has developed it is much more than that. It enables communism to spread from
behind a cloud cover of being on the side of the angels. It enables the makers
of terror and consistent users of terror to point the accusing finger at their
opponents, to describe the regime which opposes them as corrupt and oppressive.
The development of television and satellite transmission brings the evidence of
repression into the homes around the world while the provocative acts have
either already taken place or are concealed.

Examples are so numerous that they can only be alluded to. In the 1930s, Edgar
Snow described the Kuomintang of Chiang Kai-shek as corrupt and oppressive. He
told stories in the *Saturday Evening Post* of such things as the burying of
peasants alive by minions of the regime. In the 1950s, Americans, and others,
were treated to tales of the cruel tortures in Batista's prisons in Cuba. More
recently, there have been stories of terror by the Greek Colonels and the
Argentine Generals. The Buddhists who burned themselves alive—who terrorized
themselves, so to speak—were the *cause célèbre </i>which brought down Diem in
Vietnam.

## The Kent State Event

There is ample, even overwhelming evidence that much of the violence used
against communists and other revolutionaries is deliberately provoked.[^25_5]
The reverse terror which communists find most useful is some incident which can
be magnified, dramatized and can become the symbol of the repression of a
regime.  "Bloody Sunday" became such an incident in Czarist Russia. The event
occurred in St. Petersburg in 1905 when demonstrators marched on and massed
before the Winter Palace. The throng ignored commands to turn back and the
firing of blanks, so the soldiers fired into their ranks, killing some of the
demonstrators. Here was the dramatic incident which could be recalled over and
over again for purposes of undermining the government.

The happenings at Kent State University in the spring of 1970 provide an example
of the reverse terror tactic. There is space here only to give a bare outline of
what occurred. Prior to the events that have become known as "Kent State," a
radicalization of much of the student body had taken place. The Students for a
Democratic Society was the organization most directly responsible. The local
chapter was provided with additional revolutionary fervor from time to time by
"regional travelers," adults trying to spark activity in the locals. Among the
regional travelers to Kent State were Bernadine Dohrn, Terry Robbins, and Mark
Rudd. Miss Dohrn professed to be a revolutionary communist, and Terry Robbins
was known as "V.I.," the initials used by Lenin.[^25_6]

On May 1, 1970, public announcement was made concerning a series of bombings by
the United States Air Force of the access route to South Vietnam used by the
Communists. This was made the occasion for student eruptions on a goodly number
of campuses. Saturday, May 2, became the target day for action at Kent State.
The ROTC building was burned; thugs with clubs beat off those who tried to put
out the fire; and an atmosphere of terror prevailed as other buildings were
threatened. The National Guard was sent in to restore order. The Guardsmen were
subjected to a continual torrent of verbal abuse. A grand jury declared that
"the verbal abuse directed at the Guardsmen by the students during the period in
question represented a level of obscenity and vulgarity which we have never
before witnessed. The epithets directed at the Guardsmen and members of their
families by male and female rioters alike would have been unbelievable had they
not been confirmed by the testimony from every quarter...."[^25_7]

The Guardsmen were confused and frustrated—terrorized–after a weekend of such
psychological warfare. On that fateful Monday, as the Guardsmen began a retreat
to regroup there was a large throng of rioters on their right flank. A
contingent of Guardsmen turned back, pointed their rifles toward the throng, and
began to fire. Four students were killed.

The revolutionaries had their event now. Hundreds of colleges and universities
were closed down. A moment of reverse terror had taken place, one which could be
made into a battle cry, one which could be turned into a symbol for an alleged
repressive society. The symbolic fire ignited there soon subsided, but there are
still smoldering coals which are fanned from time to time in the hope of
kindling a flame.

The thrust of the disordering terror is toward civil war. Indeed, the
disordering terror becomes regularized when sustained guerilla warfare is
underway. Guerilla warfare is terrorism leading directly toward the seizure of
power. Since his death. Che Guevara has been the symbol of this mode of
operation as it has caught on in various places around the world.

The other stages of the terror can only be described in brief here. While it is
important to know that they occur, they belong to the story of the consolidation
of revolution rather than directly to its spread. They do help to confirm the
fact that undergirding communist power is a prolonged and permanent terror. Of
course, once communists have seized power they not only monopolize it but the
terror as well.

## The Terror of Suppression

The second stage of the terror is The Terror of Suppression. This is the terror
which accompanies and follows upon the seizure of power. Although there is no
timetable, so far we know, it has usually lasted as long as two to three years.
In the Soviet Union, its dates were 19181921, those that are usually given for
the civil war. In Hungary, it was approximately 1945-1948. In Cuba, it occurred
mainly within a couple of years of Castro's seizure of power.

This terror has a specific purpose. It is to bring all power into the hands of
the communists. Communists do not usually get all power directly. They usually
share power with a coalition, such as other revolutionary parties, labor union
leaders, peasant and other farmer organizations, and military leaders who are
more or less under their sway. Moreover, the organizations through which society
normally operates—business firms, churches, fraternal associations, schools, the
media of communication, local governments, and so on—may be independent
organizations on which hold over the central government has no immediate impact.
Beyond these, there is the matter of the bulk of property being in private
hands. All other political parties must be suppressed, all organs of force
brought under the communists, social organizations made subservient to communist
rulers, and property seized. Terror is essential for a minority to accomplish
such a coup.

Such political parties as are permitted for a time are terrorized by the police
whom the communists control. Any parties that remain are then fused with the
communist party. The leaders are generally disposed of in one way or another.
For example, "The Roumanian socialist party had always been very small and weak;
it won some importance in 1945 only because it was less disliked by the
Roumanian workers than was the communist party. But communist pressure,
reinforced by Soviet military power, quickly brought it to heel. At a congress
held in March 1946 the party split, the opponents of the communists forming a
separate party which had but a short life. In November 1947 'fusion' took
place."[^25_8] Which is to say that only the Communist Party remained.

## Absorbing Other Groups

Other organizations survive only to the extent that they are useful to communism
and can be controlled by the communists. The old leaders are subjected to such
terror as may be necessary to drive them out or subordinate them. In doing this,
as well as seizing private property, communists use to good effect the greedy
and avaricious have-nots among the populace. Castro's regime in Cuba illustrated
how this may be done shortly after the seizure of power. Castro organized
militia units to take over organizations and to bully those within them into
submission. Paul Bethel says that "Almost without exception ... the militia
units ... came from the bowels of ... society. The least productive and the
least capable were to be found there...."

Dressed in militia uniforms, authority dangling from the holsters on their hips,
hotel bus boys, garbage collectors, taxi drivers and office clerks found that
they could intimidate their superiors and receive the support of the
revolutionary regime.... As organization progressed, instructions began to flow
through the ranks, instructions which had no other aim than to bring the whole
of Cuban society under .the control of government....

Local labor unions began to lose their hold on laborers as militiamen usurped
both power and position. Union officials were intimidated, harassed, and
threatened outright....

More than one business leader was jolted when a group of militiamen-employees
walked unannounced into his office and flatly told him how to conduct his
business....[^25_9]

This was but prelude, of course, to the taking over of private property. Quite
often this has been accomplished in a mob-like atmosphere as renters seize the
places where they live, as employees seize factories, and as peasants seize the
land.

## The Transformation Terror

The third stage may be called The Transformation Terror. This is in many ways a
continuation of The Terror of Suppression, but it is often enough sufficiently
separate from it to constitute a separate stage. It is probable that many
Russians in the 1920s and Chinese in the 1950s believed that the worst of the
terror was behind them. They had undergone The Terror of Suppression. But worse
lay ahead—The Terror of Transformation. This is the stage of the totalizing of
power, the wiping out of the last relics of independence, the purging of the old
revolutionaries, the taking of lands and factories from peasants and workers, if
that has not already taken place, and the molding of the population to the will
of the rulers. Terror may be reckoned to be as essential to these tasks as to
the others. This was the period of the Stalinist terror in Russia.

Its transformation character may be best illustrated by the Cultural Revolution
which took place in Communist China in the mid-1960s. This revolution was
promulgated and let loose by the communist leaders. It was a purge, not only
within the Party but in the society at large. The instrument used for the purge
was students—young people in high school and college. Its purpose was to
discredit and shake from power the bureaucracy which exercised authority in
China. In terms of communist ideology the bureaucracy had become corrupt and
reactionary. In fact, one suspects, power had become to some degree dispersed in
China. It is a natural tendency for authority to become dispersed, for those who
exercise power, however acquired, to begin to do so as a matter of right.
Indeed, some of the harshness of dictatorship is often reduced by the dispersal
of authority. At any rate, the government sponsored a rampage by students
against authority, and those who had exercised power, as well as the general
populace, were terrorized for several years.

The first to be terrorized generally were school administrators and instructors.
Many of these were brought before students to be judged. They were accused of
being corrupt reactionaries. They were humiliated, tortured, often enough
stomped and beaten, made to confess and recant, and stripped of their authority.
From the schools, the revolution expanded out into factory and field. Students
battled with the police and, at times, even took on the army. Civil war raged,
instigated by the top leaders of China.

Mao Tse-tung and Chou En-lai had shown much greater imagination in unleashing
terror than had Stalin. To set the young to terrorizing their elders must surely
be the ultimate betrayal of a people by the government.

## The Permanent Terror

So far as can now be determined, the fourth stage, The Permanent Terror, may be
the final stage. When the populace has been terrorized into submission the
terror subsides. There may, of course, be new outbreaks of terror, and the
possibility of these is surely a part of the permanent terror. But the outward
terror is generally greatly reduced. It can be more subtle, be psychological
more often than physical, become a permanent war on the spirit of man. Terror
becomes an enduring threat, an intimidating force which permeates life.

In its deepest dimensions, the terror arises from the use of force unredeemed by
love. The Reverend Richard Wurmbrand tells this story. It occurred somewhere
behind the Iron Curtain, in what country I do not know. Mr. Wurmbrand was no
longer permitted to have the forum of a pulpit or any other formal setting for
his preaching. So he went about quietly, taking the Gospel to such individuals
as would hear it.

One day he fell into conversation with an army officer on the street. They
talked for a bit, and Mr. Wurmbrand invited the officer to his home. When they
had sat down, Mr. Wurmbrand related to him the story of the life of Jesus, and
of his death on the cross, in a simple and direct manner. When he had finished,
the officer's eyes filled with tears and he wept unashamedly. In explanation, he
said something to this effect: I did not know that there was such a man. I did
not know that there was such love.

No doubt, the army officer knew much of hate. He had during his lifetime been
subjected to a constant barrage of propaganda aimed at arousing his hatred for
the class enemy. No doubt, he knew something of the brutalizing use of force by
the regime over him. He must have witnessed the jockeying for power and
privilege. Surely, he had experienced sexual<b> </b>appetite, and there must
have been those along the way for whom he had affection.

What a relief it must have been to find himself warmed by a transcendent love, a
love that had in it no element of calculation, a love that expressed itself
through sacrifice, a love that somehow had reached across the ages from a
carpenter in Galilee to touch an army office in Eastern Europe!

The ultimate terror is the pervasive use of force in an atmosphere of hate. This
is the permanent terror of communism.

Next: *26. The Cold War: The Spread of Gradualism.*

[^25_1]: Whittaker Chambers, *Cold Friday* (New York: Random House, 1964), pp.
  149-50.

[^25_2]: Marguerite Higgins, *Our Vietnam Nightmare* (New York: Harper &amp;
  Row, 1965), p. 14.

[^25_3]: Bernardo Teixeira, *The Fabric of Terror* (New York: Devin-Adair,
  1965), p. 100.

[^25_4]: Eugene H. Methvin, *The Riot Makers* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington
  House, 1970), pp. 361-62.

[^25_5]: See *ibid.,* chs. XI-XIII.

[^25_6]: See James A. Michener, *Kent State* (Greenwich, Conn.: Fawcett, 1971),
  pp. 85-104. *'Ibid.,* p. 222.

[^25_7]: Hugh Seton-Watson, *From Lenin to Malenkov* (New York: Frederick A.
  Praeger, 1955), p. 258.

[^25_8]: Paul Bethel, *The Losers* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1969),
  *p. 125.*

