# World in the Grip of an Idea: 29. The Cold War: Co-existence, Detente, and
  Convergence

[Tuesday, May 1, 1979](https://fee.org/the-freeman/may-1979/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

When the Cold War was at its height, it was sometimes suggested that there was a
parallel between it and the religious wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. The idea behind the making of this analogy was supposedly to put the
Cold War in perspective. Those who pushed the analogy were saying, in effect,
"Look, don't get so excited about this conflict. Our forebears went through just
such a conflict. There was a time when men were so heated up about religious
differences that they fought grisly wars with one another about them. And what
do we, with the advantage of historical perspective, think of the merit of these
differences? Do we think them worth fighting about? Hardly!"

There are some interesting parallels between the earlier religious wars and
those of this century, more interesting even than those who have advanced the
analogy have pointed out. The earlier conflicts were between Christians, people
of the same basic faith. The ideological conflicts of this century are between
socialists, mainly, people of the same faith. In both conflicts, considerable
attention has been paid to doctrinal differences, and differences in practice
have occasioned acrimony. Moreover, socialists have been as inclined toward
sectarian squabbles over dogma as Christians ever were.

There is yet another parallel. Both the earlier religious wars and the twentieth
century conflicts were or are contests over political power; but since this
parallel is crucial, the discussion of it should wait for a bit.

Reasoning by analogy has its pitfalls, however. Where complex phenomena are
involved, as in these conflicts, it is important to attend both to similarities
and to differences. It is even more important to distinguish between superficial
similarities which may be accidental and critical differences which may be
essential. Nor is any valid historical perspective to be gained by ignoring
critical differences.

## Living with Differences

It is true that Christians are generally at peace with one another in the world
today. It is also true that sectarian differences which once were battle cries
hardly excite a murmur. A certain amount of convergence has even taken place
amongst some Christians, but it is also the case that where some union takes
place, those who oppose the union often form their own denominations. The
important point to get at, however, is to understand why Christians are
generally at peace with one another. It is not, as secularists may suppose, that
differences in doctrine no longer matter, or that there has been a decline in
religion and religious fervor. It may be the case that dogmas are not generally
so sharply defined or keenly felt as they were, say, in the course of the
Protestant Reformation. But that is surely only a matter of degree and is by no
means universal. As to a decline in religion, there has been such a decline
among intellectuals in the last century, accompanied by an impact on the
intellectual climate. This does not of itself signify a decline in religious
belief but rather an intellectual narrowing of its import.

In any case, religious enthusiasm has waxed and waned several times in the
period since religious differences among Christians were the occasion of any
widespread conflict. This suggests to me that the degree of religious belief is
not the key to an explanation of martial conflict over religion.

## Conflicts Over Power

Religious differences only become an occasion for warfare when religion is
linked to political power. To put it another way, conflict arises over the
attempt of those who hold political power to force their beliefs on others who
differ with them. Or, it can arise when there is a contest between those who
have differing religious persuasions over who shall exercise the power in
matters of religion.

The Protestant Reformation, and the Catholic Counter-Reformation, spawned wars
because state and church were intertwined and because only one religion could
be, or was, established. The power contest contributed much to sharply defined
dogmatic positions and thus to the proliferation of denominations. (The more
sharply drawn doctrinal positions are the less the likelihood of general
agreement. But doctrines must be sharply defined if adherence to them is to be
enforced by law.) The way to religious peace is to deny to any religion the
power to force its doctrines on others or to establish its religion over them.
This idea is found in the doctrine of the separation of church and state.

The matter runs deeper than this, however. There is a critical and essential
difference between Christianity and modern socialism. At bottom, Christianity is
not a power theory. As was earlier affirmed, socialism—whether revolutionary or
evolutionary—is a power theory. But let us consider the case of Christianity
first. It has already been pointed out that when Jesus went into the wilderness
and was tempted that he rejected the vision of an earthly kingdom or empire.
That is, he rejected the use of force to attain his ends. He did so again, in
another way, just before his trial and crucifixion. When Judas betrayed Jesus
and the crowd laid hands on him, this event occurred:

> And behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew
> his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear.
>
> Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they
> that take the sword shall perish by the sword. (Matthew 26:51-52)
>
> It should be made clear, however, that these remarks were made in connection
> with the attainment of his ends. Jesus goes on to say that he could have
> legions of angels to defend him, if he would but ask. "But how then shall the
> scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be." (Matthew 26:54)

## No Use of Force

Christianity is not a power theory. Jesus rejected the use of force to achieve
his purposes. The methods he employed were concern, love, healing, sacrifice,
attraction, and persuasion. Those who would follow him, he bade to take up,
*not* their swords, but the *cross* (i. e., the way of sacrifice). What Jesus
seeks cannot be attained by force. Men cannot be made to believe. They cannot be
forced to have a change in which they comprehend the superior reality of spirit.
The sword is an instrument of death, not of life, and he said that he came to
bring life.

None of this is said to deny the obvious, namely, that many of those who have
professed to be his followers have taken up the sword with the avowed purpose of
defending or advancing Christianity. They have often enough intertwined religion
with government. They have established churches by law. They have used the force
of government to attempt to compel many things that were said to be in keeping
with Christianity.

But they have not done so with the authority of Jesus; they have done so because
they were impatient, because they were weak, because they were willful, because
they substituted their wills for the will of Him they claimed to follow. They
have even beset one another in violent and destructive wars. The carnage of the
religious wars, and especially of the Thirty Years' War, was great. They took up
the sword, and many perished by it. That prophecy was fulfilled, not for the
first time and, sadly enough, not for the last, for it has lately come to pass
once again in Ireland.

Christianity does not require the use of force. On the contrary, Christianity
cannot be advanced by force. We have it on good authority that if God willed to
use force He could call forth such force as none could resist Him. But He does
it not, for it is foreign to His nature and to His purpose. He wills peace,
harmony, love, and that men should be at one with Him. These ends *cannot* be
attained by force. To put it philosophically, in essence Christianity is not a
power theory. When this guise has been forced upon it, it has been accidental
and attributable to the weakness of men.

## Socialism a Power Theory

Socialism *is* a power theory. In essence, it is nothing but a power theory. Its
affinity for the state is as near absolute as anything can be in this world. The
further it goes toward its goal the more absolute its reliance on the state.
None of this is accidental. It follows inexorably from the professed goal and
from the complex of hatreds which animate it. The moment socialists abandon the
state as the instrument for the achievement of their purposes they cease to be
socialists, and socialism is no more.

Socialist thinkers did not, we may believe, consciously set out to contrive a
scheme to bring about such a state of affairs. Many of them did not even embrace
the state willingly, and most have professed reluctance. For Marx, the state was
to be a temporary expedient, something to be used temporarily until its purpose
had been achieved and it could wither away. Gradualists have labored mightily to
hide the mailed fist of the state behind the velvet glove of democracy.

What socialists contrived, whether they sought to do so or not, was a religion,
or substitute for religion. It was a religion of man, and it was a man-made
religion. The appeal of the idea that has the world in its grip is fundamentally
religious. It has within it elements derived from traditional religions, but in
it they become earth-bound and temporally oriented. The promise of the idea is
that all things shall be made right here on earth and that man shall be finally
liberated. The tacit promise is of an end of all restraint, and hence of an end
to government and the use of force upon people. Man's inhumanity to man, a
favorite phrase of those enlivened by the idea, will cease.

That the application of this idea with the avowed purpose of fulfilling the
promises leads to statism, to terror, to violence, or to the ubiquitous use of
the force of the state has been the burden of this work to show. But why should
it do so? Indeed, why must it do so? Because of the premises which underlie
socialism. Society is rent and sundered by a fundamental disharmony. The
disharmony results from man's pursuit of his own self-interest, socialists
claim. This, they say, turns man against man, defeats the common good, results
in pervasive injustices, and is the occasion for the use of force. The received
social institutions support and reinforce the pursuit of self-interest. The
disharmony is thereby institutionalized.

In theory, a religion of humanity could change all this. There are, here and
there, devotees of such a faith. And socialists in general subscribe to its
tenets. But the idea that has the world in its grip is not the religion of
humanity. Its religion is statism. The reasons for this may not be apparent, but
they can be surmised. There are two main ones, I think.

## The Trouble with Abstractions

The first of these is the inadequacy of the religion of humanity as a religion.
It is a pallid thing. It is the worship of an abstraction which can never be
personified. That is, man in the abstract, or humanity in the abstract, can be
an object of veneration only so long as it does not entail actual men. Actual
men have faults, something which most of us discover sooner or later, and are
therefore not fit subjects for worship. A religion with wide appeal must have
both personification and some sort of transcendence, or, at least, unquestioned
purity. Abstraction is not transcendence, and actual men lack purity.

The other need of socialism as a religion was a means or instrument for altering
social institutions and transforming man. By their focus on man and this world,
they denied a transcendent being, thereby requiring that their instrument be
immanent. The dimensions of the problem made the choice of the state as the
instrument inevitable. Only something with power over the whole could
conceivably achieve the alterations and transformations involved.

*State* is the crucial term here. Socialists are not much given to making the
distinction, and they are quite unlikely to proclaim themselves as state
worshipers, but there is a crucial distinction between state and government. The
worship of government is attended by the same difficulty as the worship of
humanity. The difficulty is that actual governments have flaws, or rather the
men who man them do.

The state is an abstraction; it is pure; it can even be an ideal. Power vested
in the state cannot be misplaced, for it is the natural depository of all power
over a given territory. Sovereignty, absolute sovereignty, is its prerogative,
its reason for being. The state, in socialist underlying conception, is the
rightful instrument of "the people," and so far as it acts for "the people,"
whatever power *is* exercised is legitimate. (Communists sometimes say
proletariat rather than people, but for them the proletariat is "the people.")

A constant struggle goes on to bring the government up to the level of the
state, i. e., to make it a perfect instrument of "the people." What prevents it
from being so is the persistence of "the class enemy," as communists put it, or
of conservatives, reactionaries, business interests, or "the vested interests,"
in 'gradualist countries. "Fascism," which is the socialist conceptual
personification of all the evil forces, is ever lurking around the corner ready
to seize and misuse the power of the state.

## The Disappearing State

When the class enemy has finally been eradicated, when the last "fascist" has
been rounded up, when the "vested interests" are at last divested of their power
and influence, then government can be raised to the level of the state. "The
people" will be identical with government, and government and state will merge.
When this state of affairs comes about the use of force would be a redundancy.
There could be no occasion for the use of force, for the will of the governors
could be no different from the will of "the people." Communists have usually
declared that this state of affairs will shortly come about. Gradualists foresee
a much more extended struggle, with no culmination now in sight. In any case, it
is a struggle for power, for the monopolization of all power by "the people."

This is the mystic vision of socialism. So far as it is a religion, it is a
religion of state worship. And that turns out to be a worship of power. The
whole world is caught in the vise-like grip of an idea which propels it into the
struggle toward power. The idea promises beatitude; it leads to destruction, to
tyranny, to murder, to rapine, to suicide. The idea requires the sublimation of
the individual to the state. This requirement is no less than the death of the
ego or the end of the individual self.

It is possible to commit suicide, of course, without going through the whole
vast process of lengthy evolution, massive revolution, the creation of a vast
state mechanism, and so on. The Jones cult showed the way in the horrifying mass
suicide-murder at Jonestown, Guyana. Self-immolation, the tacit goal of
socialism, can be achieved directly by individuals, cults, and small groups. But
that is a "cop out," so to speak, for it must be done on a world-wide scale.

What has all this to do with coexistence, with détente, and with convergence? It
has everything to do with them. Can East and West coexist? Can peace be attained
by a policy of détente? Will communism and gradualist socialism eventually
converge? There is no way to answer these questions definitively, of course, for
they entail events and developments that have not yet taken place, if they ever
will.

## A Clearer Picture

There is a way to understand, however, what is involved in peaceful
co-existence, détente, and convergence. It is through understanding the idea
that impels the developments. Trying to make heads or tails of them with
historical data in the absence of the ideological framework is akin to trying to
put the pieces of a puzzle together without a picture of the completed puzzle
before you. Explanations shift with changing leaders and changing policies, and
no clear pattern emerges. The Chinese and Russians squabble over the meaning of
coexistence. Soviet leaders hint at the possibility of convergence. Is détente
anything more than the one step backward of the old Stalinist formula of two
steps forward and one step back?

All these things begin to come into focus when we perceive that socialism is a
power theory. Communism is a theory of coming to power, extending, and holding
it by way of revolution. Evolutionary socialism is a theory of coming to power
and extending it gradually by means that only subtly alter the received
framework. Co-existence, détente, and the possibility of convergence are
*tactics* in the struggle for power. Peaceful co-existence and détente are
communist tactics for moderating the conflict and allowing time and room for
further communist expansion to take place. Convergence is not an avowed policy
of the communists, and it cannot be so long as and to the extent that they are
wedded to the idea of the necessity of revolution. Convergence is the dream,
however, of many Western intellectuals. Every accord between East and West
arouses hope that convergence is coming. It may well be a communist tactic to
keep that hope alive.

Socialism is not just a power theory; it is a power theory animated by a mystic
religion. It has a world vision. That vision is of the whole world under a
single power, of every organization and every individual subordinated to that
power. Only then, it is felt, can the vision of socialism become an actuality.
So long as there is one independent power in the world, the peace, i.e.,
socialism, is threatened. I understand this to mean that co-existence can never
be more than a temporary policy. In like manner, detente can never be more than
a temporary policy. Thus far, history bears this out. Co-existence and detente
are largely illusions of Western intellectuals and the governments under their
sway.

## The Prospect of Change

Can communism not change? It depends upon what is meant. If it is a question of
tactics, there is no doubt that communism can and does change. Communist tactics
differ considerably from one country to another. Chinese and Cuban communism
belong to the same genus, but they are quite different national species.
Moreover, the tactics change greatly from time to time and under different
leaders in the same country. Many of Stalin's tactics differed greatly from
those of Lenin, and Khrushchev disavowed many of Stalin's tactics. Stalin
fostered militant anti-fascist tactics in the Comintern for most of the 1930s,
then entered into a pact with the Nazis. Communists have sometimes formed
political parties, or semblances of them, and had candidates run for office in
lands where they were not in power. At other times, they have refused to run for
office on the grounds that such elections were a bourgeois trap. Tactics are but
accidents, philosophically speaking, something to be changed according to the
circumstances.

But could communism not change in essence? Those who believe in this possibility
have not fronted what is involved. What is communism in essence? Communism is
power, to restate the position. It is power wedded to a mystic vision of world
dominion. Or, mysticism or not, it is power thrusting to the monopoly of all
power in the world. Any essential change within communism would necessarily
entail yielding up the monopoly of power which has been substantially attained
wherever a communist system prevails.

If one party rule were relinquished so that two or more parties could compete,
the monopoly of power would be gone. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press
entail public debate in which appeals by those who differ are directed toward
the populace. They would inevitably divide the populace and undercut the
monopoly of power. The same goes for freedom of religion and any significant
amount of private property.

## A Monopoly of Power

Communist systems have that toward which all socialism tends, namely, a monopoly
of power. Why would communists give it up? Better still, what would happen if
they did? Communism without power is only a fantasy. It is like an electrical
appliance without electricity; it is inoperative. Communism without a monopoly
of power is not communism. It would be as if the revolution had not occurred.
Communism without a monopoly of power would be, at most, another variety of
evolutionary socialism. But evolving toward what? Evolving toward the monopoly
of all power, something which communists had already attained in their own
countries.

There is another reason why communism cannot change, or perhaps it is only the
logical extension of the reasons given above. *All socialism is braced to
communism!* The idea that has the world in its grip finds its culmination in
communism, in the monopoly of all power in the state. All socialist roads lead
to Moscow, to Peking, to Havana, or to wherever a communist regime is
established. Socialist intellectuals are drawn to these centers as surely as the
moth is drawn to the light. Much of the intellectual history of the twentieth
century, or at least the history of intellectuals, could be written about these
pilgrimages to the New Rome. It is not knowledge that draws them there, nor
exactly the quest for it. It is a feeling, a feeling that they will find there
the concrete reality toward which they yearn. Whether they do so depends upon
the degree to which they cooperate with their hosts by succumbing to the
illusions presented for their edification.

If communism should fall—that is, lose power everywhere—the whole structure of
socialism must crumble with it. It would happen because there would no longer be
a concrete reality to sustain socialism. Socialists would discover that they
were leaning into thin air. The measures of gradualists would be proposals to be
treated on their own merits, for they would have no vision behind them. Remove
the religious mystic vision from socialism, and its proposals become transparent
crackpot schemes.

Communism has often enough been an embarrassment to Western socialists, of
course. Communists even commit the unpardonable sin sometimes, i. e., persecute
intellectuals. But it is the embarrassment which children feel about the
behavior of their parents. Remove the parents, and the family disintegrates.
Remove the communist parents of socialism and the family of socialism will
disintegrate. Socialism was only a fantasy until World War I. It took on flesh
and blood with the Bolshevik Revolution. With the Nazi Revolution it took place
in yet another guise. With the defeat of the Nazis and their Fascist allies,
revolutionary socialism survived only in its communist manifestation, and it is
in that manifestation of it that we may know it best today.

Braces work both ways, however. To say that evolutionary socialism is braced to
communism is but another way of describing the dependence of communism on the
noncommunist world. The dependence of evolutionary socialism on communism is
largely spiritual. It is the religious ingredient in communism—the vision of a
forward marching triumphant world socialism riding the wave of History—that is
necessary to sustain evolutionary socialism and propel it onward. By contrast,
the dependence of communism upon the noncommunist world *is* political and
economic.

## Diplomatic Recognition

Politically, the noncommunist world provides the stamp of legitimacy to the
communist powers. By treating them as regular governments—by according
diplomatic recognition, by making treaties and agreements, by carrying on
various sorts of intercourse—noncommunist powers say, in effect, to the captive
peoples in communist countries, "Yours is a legitimate government. It rightfully
imposes its will upon you, for it is entitled to all the prerogatives of a
government." More, by recognizing the legitimacy of the regimes, it tends to
countenance whatever communist governments do to their people as being their
business since such matters involve internal affairs.

Communism is a vast counterproductive system economically. Its primary aim of
exercising power and extending that power over the peoples of the world makes it
a counterproductive system. It is not that the rulers of communist countries
lack the desire to have economic production and efficiency; it is rather that
the repression entailed in the communist effort makes it impossible to achieve.
The freedom to innovate is largely taken away, and the rewards for producing are
arbitrary and insufficient to spur production. Hence, the relics of freedom in
the noncommunist world provide invaluable aid to communism.

Communists depend largely on the noncommunist world for inventions, for
technological innovations, and for the fruits of scientific progress. Grain
shipments from the West have helped much in staving off famine in communist
countries in recent years. Communist rulers lust after Western machinery. Take
away the West, and the retrogressive character of communist economies would be
even more transparent.

These braces should be conceived as temporary, however. When a building is
completed the temporary braces are removed. Communist dependence on the West is
always conceived as an expedient matter by communists. In like manner, the
dependence of Western intellectuals upon communism is necessary only so long as
socialism has not been achieved at home. In short, the mutual dependence is
temporary when viewed from either angle.

The greatest threat to peace at the present time, such peace as there may be, is
aggressive, belligerent, and expansive communism. Gradualist socialist countries
do not pose any great threat at this time. They are most likely to disturb the
peace by resisting the spread of communism. But the prospect of that has
lessened in recent years. The United States does not appear to have the will to
resist communist expansion now. Indeed, resistance was always hemmed in by such
subtle niceties that it was far from effective. So far as other highly developed
industrial nations are concerned, their will to resist communism has never been
strong.

## Domestic Problems

This is not to say that evolutionary socialists are just naturally peace loving
people without desire for power. It is rather that each gradualist socialist
country has a domestic power problem. Communists usually solve their domestic
power problem shortly after coming to power. They concentrate all power, subdue
all organizations, and imprison or kill such opponents of the regime as can be
discovered or imagined. It takes only a few years to do this ordinarily. Then,
the communist thrust for power shifts outward upon the world. Gradualists, by
contrast, are unwilling or unable to grasp all power over the domestic
population. (They would cease to be gradualists if they did.) Thus, their power
struggle continues domestically; they do not have to look outward in their quest
for additional power. Gaining and consolidating power over their own people
remains a problem large enough to occupy much of their attention.

The United States has been a partial exception to this rule. The presidential
system of government, with the president in charge of the conduct of foreign
affairs and in command of the armed forces offers power incentives for foreign
involvements. That is, presidential power tends to increase as foreign affairs
become more important. This does provide the basis for an outward thrust to
American power. However, intellectuals and the media, both domestic and foreign,
appear finally to have convinced our presidents that they are not to extend
their powers by way of resistance to communism. There is a way, however, to get
their accolades; it is to reach accord with communist countries. Presidents
Nixon, Ford, and Carter appear to have learned this lesson well. Congress has
cooperated by circumscribing the presidential instruments for resisting
communism: the military, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the CIA.

It is conceivable that there could be convergence between East and West.
Evolutionary and revolutionary socialism have common goals—the concerting of all
human effort, the removing of all centers of opposition to it, and the use of
collectivist means. They both sanction, in practice, the vesting of the state
with increasing power. It is plausible to suppose that as the West becomes more
and more statist, if indeed it does, it would merge with the East.

## Convergence a Dream

Convergence is, however, a dream, and a hope only of Western intellectuals and
the politicians under their sway. There is no hard evidence that communists
would converge with gradualists. A deeper look suggests how unlikely this is.
Total power can be joined to partial power only by either totalizing all power
or reducing the total power. Thus far, all the historical evidence that can be
brought to bear on the question leads to the conclusion that convergence with
communism is submission to communism. That is what happened in Poland, in
Hungary, in Czechoslovakia, in Bulgaria, in East Germany, in Vietnam, in
Cambodia, and so on. Any survival of contending parties as communists move to
take power is only temporary.

In any case, it is not possible at present to converge with communism, per se.
Communism is now divided. There are communist powers independent of one another.
If convergence with communism were possible it would only be possible to
converge with one or another of the communist nations or empires.

Indeed, the Cold War appears to have taken a turn. As this is being written, a
submerged conflict has been taking place over Cambodia, a conflict between the
Soviet Union which supports the Vietnamese invaders, and Red China which has
been supporting another Cambodian government. The more pertinent question now
seems to be not whether East and West can co-exist or will converge but whether
independent communist powers can coexist with one another or not, and whether
they can converge or not.

We cannot know what will actually happen in this newer contest, of course. What
we do know is that the idea that has the world in *its* grip is a mystic vision
of the eventual concentration of all power into one world power. Communism is
the most virulent embodiment of the idea. The existence of more than one
revolutionary socialist power is more intolerable to communism than the
existence of a West that has not been assimilated. The expansion of communism
has taken on a new dimension and a new urgency. It is impelled by the quest for
communist allies in the struggle over which will be the power center of
communism. Terror and violence, the established communist tactic, will probably
be stepped up, as one center of communism attempts to overawe and intimidate the
other.

The religious wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries suggest an even
more fearful prospect. The religious wars that erupted between Protestant and
Catholic lands had been preceded by a more desultory religious war, a
centuries-long conflict between Christian Europe and Islam. Although the
parallel is not exact, this conflict can be likened to that between evolutionary
and revolutionary socialism.

The contest between communist powers has the potentiality of a full-fledged
religious war, such as the Thirty Years' War in Europe. No war can equal the
fury of that between peoples of the same faith divided against one another. If
history repeats itself, the world may be in for a horrendous and cataclysmic
conflict. Be that as it may, it is to the conquest of the individual that has
already occurred or is taking place that we must turn. The world conflicts of
socialism are but a reflex on a grand scale of the determination embedded in the
idea to crush all independence.

Next: 30. *The Individual: The Victim of the Idea.*

