# World in the Grip of an Idea: 31. The Subjugation of the Individual

[Sunday, July 1, 1979](https://fee.org/the-freeman/july-1979/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

The subjugation of the individual proceeds along two parallel lines as the idea
which has the world in its grip extends its sway. One line is to bring the
individual under the domination of organizations, and ultimately of government.
The other is to use numbers in such a way as to reduce the individual to a
nullity and thus to instrument him to the purposes of those who hold power.

Collectivism is supposed to be a means of transcending the limits of the
individual, of augmenting him by joining him with others. The device by which
this is to be accomplished is the organization. The notion which makes this
appear to be possible is that the organizational whole is greater than the sum
of its human parts. But, as has been noted, the organizational whole is only
greater than the sum of its parts in its coercive and destructive potential. It
is less than the sum of its parts in its constructive potential. This is so
because rather than augmenting the constructive powers of the individual by
organization they tend to be narrowed, confined, and delimited the more firmly
control is asserted.

The collectivist reliance on organization, then, results in increasing coercion,
decreasing production, and individuals who are restrained and subdued. The
illusion that the individual could be transcended by organization arose from the
great increase in production made possible by the much more extensive use of
capital in the last two centuries.

Much has been made in this work of the religious character of the animus behind
socialism. It might be more appropriate at this point, however, in discussing
the devices of socialism, to emphasize the magical qualities attributed to them.
The veneration of the organization, and especially the state, entailed in
socialism, amounts to a belief that some sort of magic inheres in them. That man
could be transformed by these instruments requires magical components within
them. If they do have, it is black magic, for the use of force deforms rather
than transforms man.

## The Use of Numbers

But the reliance upon and use of numbers in our era provides a clearer
demonstration of how deeply we are drawn into magical incantations and
divinations by the idea that has us in its grip. The description of this will
show, too, how the individual is being subdued and subjugated by the use of
numbers.

The belief that there is magic in numbers, or at least in certain numbers, is
not new to our era, of course; it is at least as old as the earliest records of
man's doings. The number "three" has often been singled out as a potent number.
"Seven" has long been a favorite number, and it is still highly honored in dice
games. Understandably, perhaps, special properties may be attributed to "ten,"
for it is the normal number of our fingers, as also of our toes. "Thirteen" is
widely reckoned to be an unlucky number. Many people believe that they have a
lucky number, and contemporary numerology rises to its superstitious peak in the
daily selection of a number by those who play the "numbers" racket.

A number system does have strange and often wondrous aspects to it, and it may
be that the tendency to see something magical in numbers stems from these. In
any case, the use of numbers in calculation, which is their primary legitimate
use, has enabled man to formulate precisely much of his knowledge of the
universe and to extend his utilization and control over things about him. We
comprehend the universe we inhabit mainly by way of numbers: the speed of light,
the speed of sound, the distance of the earth from the sun, the length of time
it takes the earth to rotate on its axis or to make one revolution round the
sun, the law of gravity, and a great variety of other interesting and sometimes
useful information. Size, magnitude, quantity, and ratio, all now expressible
with great precision in numbers, are critical for present day production and
distribution of goods.

Interchangeable parts—possibly the single most critical technique in the vast
expansion of man's power by tools—are made possible by adherence to careful and
precise calculations. Hundreds of thousands of nuts are made which will match
the threads of a single bolt. Electricity, which cannot be seen, tasted, heard,
nor smelled can be measured to the watt and sent surging through wires in force
that will vary by only a very few volts. The size of engines—the measure of
their potential output—is now commonly expressed in cubic inches or centimeters.
The ratio of gears determines the potential speed of vehicles. And so on. In
short, man's mastery of things in the world about him is made possible or
greatly enhanced by the most precise sorts of calculations. Numbers are the
touchstone of contemporary man's control over things for his purposes.

## To Control People

The thrust of socialism is to divert the effort from the use of numbers to
control and utilize things to their use for controlling people, divesting
individuals of the control of their own affairs, and utilizing them for the
power ends of government. The late Ludwig von Mises demonstrated that in a pure
socialist system economic calculation would be impossible.[^31_1] The reason
would be that there would be no market-determined prices whose fluctuation would
provide the necessary data for calculation. His student, Murray Rothbard,
carries this insight a step farther when he declares that government ownership
of any undertaking "injects a point of chaos into the economy." This is so, he
says, for "No government enterprise can ever determine prices or costs or
allocate factors or funds in a rational ... manner."[^31_2]

It follows, I take it, that any government intervention in the market will tend
to produce a similar effect. The principle that emerges from this can be stated
this way: The greater the extent of government intervention or ownership the
*less can* numbers be used to control *things* and the *more* will the effect of
their use be (when and if they are used) to control *people.* One of the
hallmarks of socialism, as we shall see, is to use numbers to control people.

The most obvious use of numbers in gradualist countries is in the effort to
control the economy of a nation. The numbers that are believed to be relevant to
this undertaking are statistics. Ours is the only era and time in all of history
in which national statistics have been extensively collected, compiled, and
used. There is a reason for this. Statistics are just about the most inherently
uninteresting thing imaginable. They are formed by reducing persons, places, or
things, to numbers, which is the aspect of them that is positively the least
interesting. Indeed,, a statistic acquires interest ordinarily as it conveys
unusual magnitude or proportions. Insofar as it deals with the average, which is
what statistics usually do, it is to that extent uninteresting.

## Figuratively Speaking

Poets and historians sometimes used numbers in other ages. An historian writing
in the Middle Ages might refer to 10,000 archers standing upon a hill. It is
most doubtful that he, or anyone else, had counted them. What he was saying was
that a huge army of archers stood on the hill, and numbers struck him as the
best way to convey that. Ancient literature contains many references to very
precise numbers of people (usually rounded off to the hundreds or thousands),
but they are not statistics, as *we* understand such things; they are poetic
uses of numbers. It is not that people in other ages did not sometimes keep
careful records and precise accounts; it is rather that to abstract them as
statistics would not have seemed to them worth the effort.

Socialism vitalizes, animates, gives meaning and purpose to statistics. It does
this by attributing a magical quality to them. They are to be the means by which
economies are to be planned, controlled, and all efforts are to be concerted. It
would probably be possible to calculate with some precision the extent of the
spread of socialism in a country, especially of gradualist socialism, by the
degree to which statistics are kept and used. In short, the widespread use of
statistics is a phenomenon of socialism.

Statistics are an abstraction of some aspect of *history.* They tell us the
barest minimum about something or other that happened in the past—yesterday, ten
days ago, a year ago, a hundred years ago, and so on backward. (They are, it
might be said, history reduced to the idiot level, with all the juices wrung
out, with everything that made history vital left out.)

## Statistics and Prediction

The magical quality which socialists—which is to say, most of those who use
them, whether they are aware of it or not—attribute to them is that they are a
prediction of the future. One encounters evidence for such a belief all the
time. For example, the newspapers report that an electric power company has gone
before a state public utilities commission with a request for

$289,000,926 annual increase in its annual revenues, say. Almost as if it were
incidental, they also report that the request was for a rate hike. Now it is
quite conceivable that the company might get the rate hike requested and
actually experience a decline in revenues. Indeed, since the demand for
electricity is elastic, it is predictable, other things being equal, that any
substantial increase in rates will result in a decrease in consumption, either
relatively or absolutely. In fact, statistics are not a prediction of the
future; they are a desiccated record of some aspect of the past.

The only way to predict the future with any accuracy is to control it, to remove
from people as individuals the means by which they can manage their own affairs
and change the course of things. That is, of course, what socialists intend and
attempt to do. Marx claimed to have discerned the course of the future with
scientific accuracy. It was a bogus claim. Twentieth century socialists are
trying to use the power of government to make his predictions come true.

## A Tool for Planners

Statistics can be used in planning with some degree of success in a controlled
situation. Barring some catastrophic occurrence, it is possible to predict how
many classrooms will be needed in the United States for first graders next year
if we know how many five-year olds there are at present. What makes this
statistic a useful basis for prediction, however, is positive law and long
established custom. Most states have compulsory attendance laws, and the usual,
and, in many states, the required, school entering age is sometime during the
sixth year of a child. It is possible to predict where the classrooms will be
needed with reasonable accuracy if children are required to attend the school in
their district and a recent survey has revealed how many children there are. The
fewer the variables—if there are no private schools, if the population is
immobile, if no parental discretion is permitted—the more accurate the outcome
of the prediction based on statistics.

In theory, perfect planning would be possible if the population was under the
complete control of a single power (and all acts of God would cease, which
communists have tried to achieve by denying God and naturalists by denying that
He performs any acts). The thrust of socialism is toward that complete control
over men by depriving them of choices by which they might thwart the planners.
The effort to use statistics as a means to control the future pushes us toward
reducing individual man to a statistic. Specifically, it manifests itself as the
tendency to reduce man to a number.

## Calculation Impossible

Under pure socialism, Mises said, economic calculation would be impossible. But
under pure socialism not only economic calculation but all calculation would be
redundant, hence irrelevant and unnecessary. Calculation is useful only because
things are independent of us and do not necessarily conform to our will. I count
my sheep, or would if I had any, because one or more may have strayed or been
stolen, or a new one might have been born during the night, or for whatever
reason they are independent of my will.

Under pure socialism, statistics would be a command that would be perfectly
fulfilled, not a sum arrived at after the fact. Soviet communists have half-way
pretended they could do this for decades now. Their statistics are a compound of
commands, wishful thinking, and the determination to deceive those who examine
them. Expert Sovietologists have long found it necessary either to make their
own calculations or to make drastic reductions in those reported by Soviet
authorities. Clever workers in the Soviet Union can sometimes fill or surpass
their quotas—statistical commands—by having more than one worker count the same
product as his own.

Pending the arrival of *pure* socialism—an event which is at worst several eons
away, by my reckoning—socialists do find it useful to engage in calculation.
Indeed, gradualists compile statistics with greater passion than saints stored
up virtue in ages past. They calculate gross national products, consumer price
indices, wholesale price indices, the number who are unemployed, the number of
empty hospital beds, the size of the public debt, the amount of private
indebtedness, the number of people who suffer from the common cold and how many
days work are lost as well, and may, for aught I know, compute the average daily
discomfiture occasioned for victims of hangnails. With all these masses of
statistics in hand, they sally forth to "fine tune" the economy and enact
programs that their statistics tell them will assure that in the future just the
right amount of whatever is needed will be available.

The verdict is not yet in as to whether those who consulted chicken entrails to
divine the future had greater success than users of statistics, but it would not
surprise me to learn that the Department of Health, Education and Welfare has
commissioned a study on just that subject, a statistical study, no doubt.

## Assaulting the Individual

Even though calculation is still going on, indeed more of it than there ever has
been before, under the impetus of socialism numbers are increasingly being used
for another purpose. As noted earlier, the primary function of numbers is for
use in calculation. That may well be their only legitimate use, since all other
uses tend to perversions, as in gaming, magic, and superstitious practices. The
use of numbers to identify things is innocent enough so long as the maker or
owner of the object assigns the number. But even the assignment of numbers to
things is suspect when anyone other than the owner assigns the number, for it is
a usurpation of the prerogatives of ownership.

But the assignment of a number to an individual—which is the significant change
being fostered by socialism—is more than suspect; it is a subtle and symbolic
assault on the person. It has an unsavory past and portends ill for the future.
It is a device for bringing people under control of the number assigners. The
movement toward reducing individuals to numbers is grist for the mills of
socialism. It arose in the wake of socialism, reduces the human to the level of
a statistic, and instruments him for the kind of control entailed in command
statistics.

Individuality is an obstacle to collectivism. Everything that distinguishes one
individual from another, all differences in personality, any uniqueness, any
peculiarity, any rough edges, all these hinder the meshing of the individual
with the group, the organization, the class, the mass, the society, and finally
the state. The concerting of all effort requires that individuality be
sublimated, subordinated, or nullified. Numbers are the right instrument for
this.

## What's In a Name?

The sign and symbol of individuality is a person's name. It has been said that
the most pleasing sound in the world to a person is that of his own name. There
is good reason for this. It stands for his personality, his individuality, his
uniqueness, all that he has done and become. He who loves and respects himself
must in some fashion love his name, even when he does not like it as a name when
considered objectively. Religious ceremonies sometimes give public sanction to
the sacramental character of the name. In Christianity, this is often done by
linking naming with baptism. An individual's status as a distinct being is
conferred upon him socially by his name.

Naming of persons and animals is a prerogative of parents, possessors, or
trustees. In the case of minor children and animals a change in trustee or owner
may result in a change of name. In the United States, at least, when a child
becomes an adult he may by initiating the appropriate action change his name.
The assigning of numbers to objects is historically the prerogative of the
originator, maker, or owner. (Some objects are also given names sometimes, such
as boats, homesteads, and, on occasion, automobiles. This is apt to be more
playful than not, but it is an assertion of ownership in any case.)

Naming is a means of assigning distinctness and individuality. Numbering is a
device for distinguishing objects that are very nearly alike from one another.
He who names or numbers either explicitly or tacitly asserts his claim to that
which is named or numbered. In short, individuality and ownership are deeply
entangled in naming and numbering, spiritually, culturally, and legally.

It is within this context that we should view the increasing tendency to assign
numbers to persons. There is yet another context within which it should be
viewed, its grisly historical antecedents. (The end toward which an action tends
is often implicit in its beginnings.) In earlier times, criminals were often
branded. The brand was an identification and warning, a mark of degradation,
and, in view of the custom of branding animals, an emblem of ownership by the
state. The assigning of 'numbers to prisoners was a lineal descendant of
branding, a change accompanying or following upon the shift from corporal
punishment of criminals to imprisonment as a usual punishment.

## Numbers for Prisoners

The numbering of prisoners was the first ostentatious use<b> </b>of numbers in
connection with persons in the United States. The number was prominently
displayed sometimes in public places on "wanted" posters. This assigning of a
number may have had some slight residual use for identification, but that is not
its significance. It is the stamp of the state on the prisoner, the modern
equivalent of branding. It is the emblem that he is no longer his own man but
belongs to the state. A prisoner is stripped at the outset of much which sets
him apart as an individual: his possessions, his clothing, his standing in the
community, and many of his legal rights. The number is the seal of his new
status.

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, with his special insight and sensitivity, has suggested
more of the import of assigning numbers to prisoners. He says that they did not
get around to assigning numbers to political prisoners until late in the
Stalinist era, long after it was generally done for all prisoners in some
"civilized" countries. Here is an abbreviation of his account:

> Then again, they quite blatantly borrowed from the Nazis a practice which had
> proved valuable to them—the substitution of a number for the prisoner's name,
> his "I," his human individuality, so that the difference between one man and
> another was a digit more or less in an otherwise identical row of figures....
>
> Warders were ordered to address prisoners by their numbers only, and ignore
> and forget their names. It would have been pretty unpleasant if they could
> have kept it up—but they couldn't.... In work rolls, too, it was the rule to
> write numbers before names. Why before and not instead of names? They were
> afraid to give up names altogether! However you look at it, a name is a
> reliable handle, a man is pegged to his name forever, whereas a number is
> blown away at a puff. If only the numbers were branded *or* picked out on the
> man himself, that would be something! But they never got around to
> it....[^31_3]

There came a time after the death of Stalin when the authorities no longer
required the use of the numbers. Alexander Dolgun has described with what
alacrity the prisoners ripped off their numbers and flung them into the air.
"This seems like a small matter," he said, "but for all the prisoners of
Dzhezhazgan the number was the prime symbol of our slavery, of our demotion from
human being to object. Its disappearance was like the beginning of a fresh new
day."[^31_4]

Those who have suffered greatly often see with remarkable clarity. According to
legend, Dolgun was one of only a very few who have survived the duration and
degree of torture he underwent. We might suppose that he would have found the
wearing of a number of such insignificance as to be unworthy of mention.  Not
so, his conclusion goes to the very heart of the matter; the number was a symbol
"of our demotion from human being to object," of the demotion of individual man
from a value in and of himself to an object of use by others. The number is the
Sign of the Beast of the idea that has the world in its grip.

## Military Numbering

A goodly number of Americans were assigned numbers for the first time as members
of the armed forces. Whatever value these serial numbers may have had for
identifying mangled bodies, they also served a highly important symbolic
purpose. The modern armed forces have brought organization to its peak of
efficiency in doing that for which it is best suited, namely exerting force and
destroying. To accomplish these ends, the military attempts to blend the
individual into the organization in such a way that he becomes at one with it.
Close order drill, for example, has for its object making the individual act in
concert with the group. "The unit," in the argot of the armed forces, is the
organization to which he belongs, not the individual. Uniformity, obedience and
conformity are prime military values. The individuality connoted by names is an
obstacle; whereas, number connotes none of that. There is the matter, too, that
one's name is assigned by parents, and the number signalizes a new authority and
control over him.

The generality of Americans were assigned numbers for the first time in the
1930's when to have a Social Security number became a requirement for employment
in many occupations. The significance of this numbering was partially concealed
by the beneficent claims made for the undertaking, by the fact that it applied
initially mainly to industrial workers, by the fact that it was called
"insurance," and by the casualness with which numbers were issued. Too, the
number was to identify one's "contribution" to the Social Security "fund." Who
could object to that? After all, one's "contribution" certainly should be
identified in some way.

It turned out, of course, that it was not a contribution at all; it is a tax, as
the courts have decided. Nor is it insurance, in most ways that word is used. No
policies have ever been issued. Monies paid into Social Security no longer
belong to the individual. He no longer has any claim on them; they are forfeit
to the government. The only claim he has is to such benefits as Congress may
decide from time to time are to go to those who fall in the category to which
his payments and financial condition entitle him. The only management, control,
and possession he will ever have over any of this, *as* matters stand, is over
such benefit payments *as* he may receive. Even the Social Security "fund" is
a paper obligation resting on the credit of the United States.

## The Number Is Essential

It may be objected at this point that I am making too much of numbers, that what
is important is what is being done, not some incidental device by which it is
done. On the contrary, I maintain that the opposite is the case. The number is
essential; the particular thing that is done with it is only incidental. First
of all, consider this fact, all that is left of all the money I have paid into
Social Security is my number. If the money were essential and the number
incidental, I should have the money and the number should have disappeared.

But one should not rest a case on what may only be a clever twisting of words.
Even so, I would like to go one step farther along this line. Suppose that
instead of having a Social Security number that my name only were used to
identify my "contribution" to the "fund." What could I say then? All that I have
left of all that I have paid is my name? Assuredly not, for I would have my name
whether or not I had paid my Social Security tax (plus a prisoner's number if I
had not paid it, no doubt). That reveals the use of the number—a device for
asserting a distinct claim—but not its ultimate purpose.

The purpose of the number is gradually becoming clearer with the passage of
time, and new legislation. Not only *is* the percentage of the Social Security
tax being increased, not very gradually of late, either, and the coverage
extended over the years, but also the number is being used in new ways. The
Social Security number has now become a Taxpayer Identification number. By this
extension, the government has begun to use a number to assert its control and
potential ownership of all our income and resources.

## A Case in Sweden

The Internal Revenue Service considers only so much of an individual's income as
his as he can show does not belong to the government. True, the government does
not ordinarily take it all, but that is simply an incident of the legal
establishment of class rate categories and exemptions. What can happen was
lately demonstrated in Sweden. Ingmar Bergman, the famous film maker, left the
country after the government insisted that he pay taxes which he claimed
amounted to 139 per cent of his income. His decision was reached after the
following had occurred. He was called out of a rehearsal by government
investigators who hauled him away for questioning, confiscated his passport and
accused him of evading $120,000 in income taxes. Bergman protested his
innocence, but even after the criminal charges were dropped, Swedish officials
continued to dun him for the back taxes they insisted he owed. Bergman went to
pieces; he stopped work, suffered a nervous breakdown and contemplated suicide.
Then ..., having snapped out of the depression, the 58-year old director
announced he was leaving his homeland for good.

Not before declaring, however, "I am leaving my fortune in Sweden at the
disposal of the National Tax Board."[^31_5]

The idea that has the world in its grip presses governments toward taking away
the independence of the individuals, toward taking away the means by which they
might manage their own affairs, toward concerting their efforts by fitting them
into organizations. It is the assigning of a number that is essential, not
Social Security. Social Security is incidental; it is only one of the possible
means by which government takes from the individual the control over his
affairs. There are many other ways it can be and is done. The number, however,
is essential; it is that to which the individual must be reduced in order to be
instrumented by government. His name belongs to the individual; but the number
signalizes the government's claim on him.

The animus of collectivism is to reduce individual man to a number, then. It is
to reduce him to the lowest common denominator, to a one which he shares with
all other living human bodies. Only thus can he be melded with the masses of
other men. This process of enmassment is the opposite of what occurs in the
refinement of metals. In this latter process purification takes place; the best
that is in the metals is separated from the dross and preserved.

## Enmassment

The enmassing of man that occurs with collectivism may be likened to
"enslagment," or the formation of clinkers in a furnace when certain kinds of
coal are burned. Clinkers result from a melding together of the impurities in
the fuel. The best that is in man is his potentiality for originating, for
reason, for spirituality, for building, for love and concern. The enmassment of
collectivism suppresses these by giving the weight of numbers to the lowest and
worst that is in man: his irrational urges, his desire to dominate, his envy,
his will to put down that which he cannot appreciate or understand, his
opposition to what is different, and his bent to destruction. The clinkers
produced by collectivism smother the flame, just as clinkers in a furnace will a
fire.

The weight of numbers is a fearful thing for individual man. Only very strong
and sturdy men can stand for long against them in whatever way they are arrayed
against him. Numbers have imperiled the individual in all ages. It has remained
for our age to sanctify them. (Greece and Rome empowered the masses in the
period of decline but fell short of sanctifying them, I believe.) We sanctify
this weight of numbers by calling it democracy and claiming that it would be
desirable to infuse all of life with its methods. Labor unions are empowered by
government to use the weight of their numbers against individuals who desire to
work. But the weight of numbers intrudes into every realm today: suppressing,
restraining, and limiting man.

## Counting the Votes

The actual political process becomes a means of subjugating the individual under
the impetus of collectivism. Democratic socialism turns voting into a kind of
self-immolation by which the individual yields up his independence and control
over his own affairs by casting a ballot. He reduces himself to an anonymous
number and becomes a statistic. Man's potential weight in his own and in public
affairs is largely reduced to a scratch on a ballot or, more appropriately, the
turn of a wheel in a machine.

In the framework of the idea that has the world in its grip the only issue that
is supposed to arise is over what means shall be used to concert all efforts to
promote the general well-being. Not only does the individual reduce himself to a
number by voting but also to a statistic in favor of one method of being
concerted as opposed to another, if any issue at all can be discerned. The man
who wishes to manage his own affairs is unlikely to find that among the
available options.

Actually, voting for candidates may be a reasonably satisfactory means of
determining *who* shall govern, so long as the demonstrably corrupt and
unlettered are excluded. It is hardly the way to decide *what* government
shall do, however, and that is the question which gradualism continually
intrudes into the process. That is *a* constitutional question requiring for
its answer not man reduced to a number but man in the full weight of his being
as an individual.

Moreover, socialism turns voting into the quest for the holy grail. It turns the
mundane business of selecting who shall govern into the choosing of religious
leaders who are assumed to be competent to manage the transformation of man and
society. So long as a choice of candidates remains, voting is important, of
course. It does restrain politicians to know that they will have to stand for
election, nor can power ever be absolute so long as its exercise can be modified
by decisions of the electorate. But for those who do not accept the religious
vision of socialism, voting is a game of chance, with the odds arranged heavily
against them.

## Rendered Meaningless

The ultimate reduction of man is not to a number. Even when that number is only
one, it still has a fixed quality about it which resists manipulation and
control. The ultimate reduction of man is to a meaningless number. Communists
have discovered a way to do this in their "democratic process."

Elections in the Soviet Union, for example, are meaningless affairs, so far as
the participants are concerned. A Party slate has been nominated by the leaders,
and it *will* be elected. It does not matter whether one hundred, one thousand,
or one million vote: the result will be the same. Even so, a great effort is
made to get out the vote. Pressure is brought to bear on selected individuals to
go from door to door urging others to vote. Why? For one thing, as earlier
noted, there is the facade of democracy which has propaganda uses. But it serves
a highly important interior purpose as well. The individual is not only reduced
to a number which can be rendered as a statistic but also to a meaningless
number and statistic. The absolute and arbitrary power of the rulers over the
populace is demonstrated.

By coming forth to vote they apparently acquiesce both in their own
meaninglessness and the power of the rulers. The more who vote, the more
complete the demonstration of power.

The subjugation of the individual descends to degradation under communism.

Next: 32. *Restoration of the Individual.*

[^31_1]: See<b> </b>Ludwig von Mises, *Socialism* (London: Fonathan Cape, 1951),
  pp. 135-37.

[^31_2]: Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and &gt;tate* (Los Angeles: Nash
  Publishing, 1970), p. 128.

[^31_3]: *The Gulag Archipelago,* III (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1978), pp.
  58-60.

[^31_4]: Alexander Dolgun, *An American in the Gulag* (New York: Ballantine
  Books, 1975), p. 174.

[^31_5]: "Utopia's Dark Side," *Newsweek (May* 3, 176), p. 38.

