# World in the Grip of an Idea: 33. Conclusion: Loosening the Grip of the Idea

[Saturday, September 1, 1979](https://fee.org/the-freeman/september-1979/)

*In this series, Dr. Carson examines the connection between ideology and the
revolutions of our time and traces the impact on several major countries and the
spread of the ideas and practices around the world.*

As this piece is being written there is a hint of spring in the air. The ice has
melted away, and the weather has turned mild. A gentle rain has fallen,
preparing the earth for a new season. A moment ago, I heard a bird chirping
outside. The sap has begun to rise in the trees; the matted down grass blades
look here and there as if they might be changing color from brown toward green;
flowers not yet ready to bloom are nonetheless pushing gently upward toward the
sun. In a few weeks, if I mistake not, tiny green leaves will be thrusting forth
from the branches of trees, flowers will be blooming, the people will be
emerging joyfully from their winter cocoons. The earth which lately looked so
glum will be suddenly supplied, as it were, with new raiment in an ever
recurring annual cycle.

Even so, experience teaches that however hopefully we anticipate the coming of
spring we should be wary as well. Spring will not be likely to arrive without a
great struggle in the atmosphere. The warm winds blowing up from the south
collide time and again with the cold winds from the north as winter gives ground
grudgingly to spring. From these collisions there are often thunderstorms, heavy
rains, floods, high winds, and even tornadoes, the most locally devastating of
all natural phenomena. The best things in life are not free; there is always a
price to pay. Stormy weather is the price we pay for spring.

But then, on the heels of these things there comes a very special moment—a few
hours, a day, or, when we are lucky, several days—for all who will attend it. It
is a day when the sun shines brightly, when the last bit of chill has gone from
the air, when the wind has finally blown itself out and a near stillness is upon
the earth. The fragrance of flowers fills the air, the birds are singing, and
animals are at play. It is a time for sitting or lying under a tree, for
stopping the never ending struggle, for drowsing if that should occur, or just
for peaceful contemplation. At such moments, a man may be as near to peace and a
sense of harmony with nature as he gets, a nature against which he has so often
struggled. He may feel himself at the threshold of some great truth. Perhaps he
is. It is a time for reading and pondering these words of Jesus:

> "And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how
> they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:
>
> "And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
> like one of these.
>
> "Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
> morrow is cast into the oven shall he not much more clothe you, 0 ye of little
> faith?
>
> "Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we
> drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
>
> "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these
> things shall be added unto you."[^33_1]

## A Lesson in Economics

Some of these passages are surely not to be taken literally. No one is supposed
to conclude that because lilies neither toil nor spin that man need not do so
either. There are some crucial differences between lilies and man. If man were
literally to stop giving thought to what he would eat, drink, and wear tomorrow,
the cupboard would almost certainly be bare. Although the ostensible subject of
these passages is faith, they also contain a lesson in economics. A part of the
message I glean from the quotations can be stated in this way. Do not engage in
vain struggles to accomplish what you would do. (The verse which immediately
precedes those quoted reads, "Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit
unto his stature?") Get yourself in accord with the nature of things. Be right,
first, and what is good and desirable will follow from your efforts. But to
grasp the full import of this, it is necessary to delve into basic economics.

One difference between the lily and man is that man is totally dependent upon
outside sources for his energy supply. The lily is not, of course, completely
self-contained and self-sufficient. In order to grow, it requires sunlight,
water, and certain minerals. The water and minerals it extracts from the soil,
and sunlight does the rest. It makes its own energy—its food supply—by a process
of photosynthesis. Another difference between man and plant is that man can
think—even to taking thought for the morrow. And perhaps the most critical
difference, man is a moral being—with the capacity even for seeking
righteousness first. It is these differences in combination that give rise to
economy, i.e., man is energy dependent and energy in usable forms is scarce. He
uses his intellect to acquire energy efficiently, and morality prescribes what
means are rightfully available to him. Man is mobile, too, and the plant is not;
this gives more scope to his efforts at economy.

## Household and Market

Economy assumes two forms, and two only. There is, first, the economy of the
*household. It may* also be thought of as the economy of the family, but the
term will not serve in all cases. Not everyone lives in a family, but everyone
has a household, even a tramp who has only a can of beans and a makeshift
shelter. The other is the *market* economy. It can also be thought of as a money
economy, but the term is not quite so inclusive, for it is possible to have a
market without money. It would be more precise to call it an exchange economy,
but that does not distinguish it so well from the household economy in which
there may be some elements of exchange. There are those who speak of an
interventionist economy, but so far as intervention holds sway it is not an
economy. The same goes for a "planned" economy.

There are some similarities between the household and market economies.
Exchanges may occur in both, though exchange is essential to the market and
usually incidental to the household. Division of labor usually occurs in a
household of two or more people, and always in the market, or, more precisely,
it brings the market into being. Each has a rightful claim to the title of
economy, for each deals with the allocation of scarce resources.

But the differences are much more pronounced than the similarities. A key
difference is that the household is primary, basic, and fundamental; while the
market is secondary and derivative. The household is a center of value; the
market is only a utility. The household is a miniature community; the market is
a mechanism. Labor is an asset in the household; it is a cost in the market.
There are no prices in the household ordinarily; whereas, the prime activity of
the market is the determination of prices. The household is local and limited:
its locale circumscribes what can be efficiently produced; it is limited to the
wants and productive capacities of its members. Potentially, the market is
world-wide and encompasses the wants and productive capacities of all the people
in the world.

In actuality, we usually encounter the household intertwined with the market
economy. This can lead to the conclusion that there is nothing more to household
economy than what is presently described *as* consumer education, i.e., that it
consists of the most effective means for utilizing the market. On this view, the
household tends to become an extension of the market. This reverses the normal
relationship, making the market basic and the household contingent. This might
be of no great consequence in a free market, but when intervention has proceeded
to great lengths such a dependence on the market lays the household open to
political control.

The *modus vivendi* of the market is *advantage* or *gain.* Men enter the market
in quest for something different from or better than what they have. They seek
their own advantage by trade. Each person trading in the market must be assumed
to be pursuing his self-interest, else there is and can be no market. In order
to see this it is necessary only to imagine two people trying to make an
exchange with each other in which neither wants what the other has. If an
exchange took place, it could only be by gift. That would be the practical
result, too, of each seeking only the well-being of the other. In the final
analysis, it could only be an exchange for the sake of exchange.

## An Assault on the Market

The idea that has the world in its grip *is* an assault on the market. This is
so, most basically, because it is an attempt to remove the individual pursuit of
self-interest from social relations. If this could be done, there would be no
market. But there would also be no economy which could be regulated, controlled,
or managed. No means would exist for coordinating or concerting all human effort
for the supposed common good. In fact, socialism cannot dispense with the market
entirely, any more than it can dispense with the motive of self-interest. It
can, as already noted, level its attack at the independence of the individual.
This it does. In doing this, the market, or a truncated version of it, is a
prominent and essential means. Organization and numbers, as already discussed,
are the means by which it does so.

Gradualists use the market much more broadly than do communists. By taking away
much of private property, communists remove one of the basic conditions of
trade. At the same time, however, they establish a near absolute dependence upon
some sort of market for people to get a livelihood. Thus, while the market has
only an attenuated existence in communist countries, what there *is* of it, free
or not, is much more important than in gradualist countries.

## Intervention to Grasp Power

Be that as it may, the crucial theorem for an understanding of the impact of
socialism is this: *The more firmly the grip of the idea is fastened on a people
the less the advantage to the individual of exchanging in the market.* To put it
another way, the more government intervenes in, controls, and occupies the
market, the less the chance of gain for the individual in the market. That is
not to say that there are not gains to be made in the hampered market, but they
are gains increasingly to those in a position to manipulate and use government
to effect their gains. That is not an arena for individuals acting alone; it is
an arena for groups, for collectives, for organizations, and for
conglomerates—those who can mass numbers and organizations so as to grasp the
handles of power. Such activity is a way of life in every "advanced" country in
the world today. In well-run communist countries, the rulers often perceive
advantage in favoring groups, but the flow of power tends to be one
directional—from the rulers to the ruled.

We live in a world in which conditions are rigged against the individual. The
market is increasingly rigged against him; the penalties that attend its use
increase, and the costs of trading there become prohibitive. Government is
rigged against him; it attends almost exclusively to collectives and
organizations and concerns itself only with matters where large numbers are
involved. (The courts are a partial exception to this, but predicting court
decisions has become an increasingly parlous game).

The individual appears to be on the horns of a grotesque dilemma. Either he must
operate individually in a market rigged against him or he must become a part of
some collective and yield up management of many of his affairs to the group. To
put it perhaps too dramatically, it looks as if the individual must hang alone
or be hanged with the collective. That is not a socialist slogan; it is the
future toward which socialism leads.

Is there a way out? Let us look again to the lilies of the field. There are
three lessons, at least, to be learned from the lily, or almost any other plant,
for that matter. They can be concisely stated this way:

1. Mind your own business.
2. Provide for your own sustenance.
3. Fulfill yourself.

We know already, of course, that in applying these lessons we must keep in mind
that man differs from a field plant in that he is mobile, rational, and moral.
The lessons are valid, but it does take imagination to apply them.

## One's Own Business

Much of the toiling and spinning that is going on in the world today is worse
than wasted effort; it is obstructive and counter-productive. The attempt to
concert all effort—to manage economies, to fit everyone into the effort as a cog
in a machine, to project the future from the past—runs aground on human nature
and arouses resistance rather than productive effort. The attempt to transform
man into an ant can no more succeed than would an effort to make a lily into an
oak. The biological case against this possibility was well expressed a while
back by Aldous Huxley:

> In the course of evolution nature has gone to endless trouble to see that
> every individual is unlike every other individual. We reproduce our kind by
> bringing the father's genes into contact with the mother's. These hereditary
> factors maybe combined in an almost infinite number of ways. Physically and
> mentally, each one of us is unique. Any culture which, in the interests of
> efficiency or in the name of some political or religious dogma, seeks to
> standardize the human individual commits an outrage against man's biological
> nature.[^33_2]

The deeper case for the individual provided by Christianity has already been
discussed.

Plants are especially adept at minding their own business. They put down their
roots wherever the seed has fallen and reach outward to such supplies as they
can use. No lily ever poked its petals out and launched any such plaint as the
following: "Would you look at this situation! There is too much vegetation
hereabout and too little water and minerals to go around. Look at that huge
maple over there. It's going to drain all the water and minerals from the soil.
All the lilies need to get together and see that each plant gets no more than
its equal share. Moreover, we have got to do something about the uncontrolled
reproduction of crabgrass." It is not that the lilies, considered as a class,
may not have such problems; it is rather that it is no part of their business to
deal with them. Each lily deals with its own particular difficulties of getting
enough water, minerals, and sunlight.

Loosening the grip of the idea which has us in its hold requires an emulation of
the lily. The idea extends its sway by bidding us conceive of the whole world as
our business. A recent civics textbook (usually taught in junior high school)
describes a portion of the world-wide problems which confront us this way:

> In 1976 U.N. Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim said: "The problems which face
> mankind are common to all nations and all areas. It is not possible to resolve
> them any more by purely national, or even regional, responses. Slowly we have
> realized that we are physically and economically interdependent on this
> planet."

What are the world wide problems which all nations face? Among them, most
scholars agree, are:

- poverty and hunger
- over-population;
- the using up of *limited natural resources*....[^33_3]

## Pitfalls of Vanity, Immorality, and Tyranny

There is Divine warrant for believing that these problems are none of my
business, that I should give no thought to them, and am to continue on my way
without regard to the morrow. Why? Because, in the first place, it is vain to
think on such things. It is vanity for me, one who knows not the ends to which a
single child is born, to speculate about such matters as over-population. More,
think as I will, I can discern no way generally to reduce poverty and hunger
without using up limited natural resources.

In the second place, thinking on such things leads to the contemplation of
actions I believe to be wrong. Should the world's goods be redistributed by
force? But that would be theft, and Thou Shalt not Steal. The authors of the
above text suggest the direction such thought takes:

> If people live longer, the population will get even larger—unless fewer people
> are born. Should we try to cut the birth rate and work to enable people to
> live longer? Should we set an age limit beyond which we would not help people
> to live?[^33_4]

In the third place, tyranny is the logical conclusion to which such thinking
leads. Aldous Huxley described it as the Will to Order in the social realm and
described its process this way:

> Here the theoretical reduction of unmanageable multiplicity to comprehensible
> unity becomes the practical reduction of human diversity to subhuman
> uniformity, of freedom to servitude. In politics the equivalent of a fully
> developed scientific theory or philosophical system is a totalitarian
> dictatorship. In economics, the equivalent of a beautifully composed work of
> art is the smoothly running factory in which the workers are perfectly
> adjusted to the machines. The Will to Order can make tyrants out of those who
> merely aspire to clear up a mess. The beauty of tidiness is used as a
> justification for despotism.[^33_5]

It would never occur to me to go about telling my neighbors how many children
they should have. Nor would I think of advising my neighbors to cease all
efforts at keeping the elderly among them alive. Were I to do so, I should most
likely be told to mind my own business. And rightly so. Yet, once one's mind is
bent by the idea that has the world in its grip, many people experience no
difficulty in accepting the use of force to compel what they would hardly think
of making efforts to get done voluntarily at the local and concrete level.
Minding one's own business is the essential first step in loosening the grip of
the idea.

## Coercively Involved

But what is one's own business? A Secretary General of the United Nations has
said, in effect, that my business is entangled with everyone else's business.
The peoples on this planet "are physically and economically interdependent," he
has said. Let us spell out a little of what may be meant by this. If my money is
being taken to pay the hospital fee for an infant being born, how many children
that family has does become my business. If my gasoline supply is determined by
the actions of OPEC nations, I am in some measure dependent on them. It is at
least possible that what they do becomes my business: If I buy hospitalization
insurance, or automobile insurance, or any sort of insurance, my rates *may* be
determined by the behavior and carelessness of others.

To untangle this web, we need some distinctions. The distinction between a
market economy and an interventionist economy needs to be made. The rule in the
market economy is *quid pro quo.* There is a saying regarding legal settlements
that goes like this: "Leave nothing on the table." It means that nothing should
be left to be resolved later, that all accounts should be settled. The meaning
of *quid pro quo* is that all parties to a transaction have fulfilled their
commitments and that measure for measure has been given. Neither owes anything
further to the other. Such transactions take place all the time. I drive up to a
service station and order five dollars worth of gasoline. The attendant pumps
two gallons, or however much it takes to equal five dollars at his prices, I pay
five dollars, and that is that. A *quid pro quo* has been given, and nothing has
been left on the table.

Activity in the market does not, of itself, entail either dependence or
interdependence. The free market in a money economy is really a mechanism for
making exchanges by people who retain their independence one of another. Even in
contracts where some dependence is established, that dependence is temporary and
limited. "Leaving nothing on the table" does not mean that there may not be
obligations to be satisfied in the future. The phrase is used in real estate
transactions in which there may be warranties running for several years and
payments to be made for as much as thirty or more years. It means, rather, that
all these obligations are specified, agreed to, and thereby limited.

## "Left on the Table"

Government intervention intrudes force into the market. To the extent that force
plays a role *quid pro quo* is not the rule. Indeed, the idea that has the world
in its grip aims to remove *quid pro quo* from social relations, for *quid pro
quo* depends on the working of individual self-interest just as does the market
itself. In consequence, transactions in the market do tend to establish the kind
of dependence that is unlimited and may well be described as interdependence.
When force is used in the market "something is always left on the table." What
is "left on the table" is, at the least, whatever was extracted by force.
Dependence is established, because the transaction is never completed.

Let us take a simple example. Let us return to the service station and the
transaction involving purchase and delivery of five dollars worth of gasoline.
Something *was* "left on the table." The price included a state and Federal
gasoline tax. I did not get my full *quid,* though he may have got his *quo.* In
fact, I did not get five dollars worth of gasoline; I only got $4.40, say. The
service station operator and I are not quit of each other. How he runs his
business has become in some measure my business. It has become my concern,
though I may not be aware of it, that he pay the taxes collected into the proper
government collection agencies. Beyond that, it becomes my concern that the
money is properly spent on goods or services which is in accord with the law.

Of course, much more than sixty cents was "left on the table." However much more
I had to pay than I would have had to pay without the collusion of the OPEC
cartel was left on the table. All the tribute paid to tax collectors, union
wages, and so forth during the whole of the process of getting gasoline to and
from the pump was left on the table. A whole set of dependencies and
interdependencies were entailed in the transaction, many of which are very much
my business.

## Self-Supporting

Before going further with this analysis, it is in order to return to the second
lesson to be learned from the lily—To provide for your own sustenance. The lily
is equipped to make its own food literally by photosynthesis. Man is, as already
noted, energy dependent. Even so, man is normally equipped with the means for
establishing his independence. His mobility enables him to range in quest of
sources of energy and to make exchanges with others. His rationality enables him
to accumulate capital and use tools to provide for himself and his own. His
morality enables him to cooperate with others, to distinguish between what is
his and what belongs to others, and enjoins him to works of charity in aid of
those unable to provide for themselves. That he be responsible for himself and
fulfill his obligations is a necessary condition of his independence as a man.

Man's independence is contingent upon his household economy. It can be stated
simply this way: Man can be independent to the extent that and so long as his
household consumes no more than he has produced. Participation in the market
does not fundamentally alter this axiom. The market enables individuals to
specialize by providing the means for exchanging what surplus they may have for
that of others. Nor do debts which may be contracted in the market alter the
axiom; they can only defer for a time the balancing of accounts. Debts do tend,
however, to reduce the independence of the individual if they are not
counterbalanced with more or less liquid assets.

An individual may enhance his independence in the free market. By contrast, when
government intervenes to regulate, control, and use the market for its ends, the
individual can lose his independence in the market. As already indicated,
government intervention intertwines everyone's business with everybody else's.
Transactions tend to lose their limited character and to draw those who engage
in them into a continuum of effects that extend on and on. Rather than
augmenting his independence in the market, the individual is drawn into a web of
dependence and interdependence. In these circumstances, the more the individual
depends upon the market the less his control over his affairs.

## Controlling the Individual

There is another facet to government activity in the market. Governments use the
market primarily as their means of controlling and using the individual. They
collect most of their taxes there. (In the United States, the income tax is
collected, where possible, by the employer, and that is in the market too.) They
depend upon the market for prices on the basis of which taxes are levied. Beyond
that, in gradualist countries, most controls are exercised through the medium of
the market.

At the present time there are two ways to loosen the grip of the state on the
individual. One is by the concerted action of peoples to place constitutional
restraints and limits on governments. My belief is that this will only be likely
to occur when the idea that now has the world in its grip has lost its hold.
That does not have to occur on a worldwide scale, of course, and if it happens
it will most likely do so country by country. I know of no country in the world
where such an event appears imminent. But when the time is right, those with a
will to do so can discover readily the principles on which government should be
limited.

But people will be ready for limited government and a free market only when they
are ready to assume responsibility for themselves and their own. Silk purses
cannot be made from pig's ears, and freedom cannot be imposed upon a people.
Only a people who believe that man is a value will have freedom. Only those who
have a high estimate of man and his potentialities can conceive of it as
desirable for him to be free.

The greater our dependence upon others, the further are we removed from freedom.
People do not revolt and establish freedom when oppression surpasses tolerable
limits. They limit governments only when oppression becomes something they are
unwilling to tolerate. Oppression is not a preparation for freedom but rather
for greater oppression. The way for freedom is prepared by the successful
practice of individual responsibility. The man who assumes responsibility for
himself and his own is on his way to freedom, regardless of what others may be.

## Penalties on Market Activity

The other way to loosen the grip of the state, establish individual independence
and responsibility, does not require concerted actions of people. Where there is
private property, it can be done by individuals and families. The way *is* to
rely less and less on the market and more and more on the household. The
household economy is the basic—even the "real"—economy; the market is only an
extension of it. It is becoming increasingly expensive to use the market to
supply the wants of the household. Social Security taxes, income taxes, sales
taxes, import duties, excises, utility companies with monopoly privileges,
international cartels, extortions by organized labor, and so on almost endlessly
place heavy penalties on market activity. The division of labor loses much of
its advantage as the cost of transport mounts. Moreover, the more the market is
regulated the less able it is to serve the wants of the individual.

What I am suggesting is already occurring as a trend in the United States. More
and more people are learning to do-it-themselves, to maintain and repair their
automobiles, to do their plumbing and electrical work, to grow some portion of
their food, to make their clothes, to cut hair, and to do a thousand and one
other useful things. The more they do for themselves the less they are taxed in
providing for their wants. The more closely they come to a household economy the
less is the control of others over them.

The potentially valuable impact of this turn toward a household economy is the
impact it can have on loosening the grip of the idea, too. The idea that has the
world in its grasp is a grandiose idea. It is one that casts thought in the
framework of groups, classes, races, nations, and the world. Those who think in
terms of the household economy have already to some extent loosened the grip of
the idea. They are thinking in terms of producing their own goods with the least
expenditure of the means of production. That is what economy is about. When the
market is an adjunct to their economy, they will no doubt use it.

## Fulfill Yourself

The final lesson from the lily is this: Fulfill yourself. We know what that
means for a lily. It means to develop a sturdy stem which can support its
flowering and production of seeds. But under the sway of the idea that has the
world in its grip we are losing our grasp of what it means for a man to fulfill
himself We have well-nigh perfected the science of making machines, but we are
on the way to losing the art of developing men. This is so because we are under
the sway of an idea which childrenizes the race. It views man as a reflex of
class, race, nation, and the people. Its thrust is to devise a scheme which will
provide for them as if they were infants and control them as if they were
irresponsible children. Beyond that, it is to concert their efforts to provide
for the needs of everyone. It is a plan of human sacrifice. It makes of
individual man only a means.

Man fulfills himself by becoming an adult, by developing his faculties, by
exercising his skills, by becoming responsible for himself and his own, by
making choices, and by realizing his potential. Man does not naturally fulfill
himself as does the lily of the field. He must be nurtured as an infant, trained
*as a* child, educated as an adolescent, and held responsible for his acts as he
grows toward maturity. The surrounding society may aid and sustain him
throughout life. Government has for its task to protect his life and property.

It is not in derogation of society, of organizations, or of whatever other
groups there may be that it is observed that they are all adjuncts to the
individual; they are servants not masters. Man too is a servant at his best, but
he is at his best only when he is serving at his own good will and in ways that
he decides.

## The Road to Tyranny

It is idle, vain, and potent with destruction for men to take thought for the
morrow of the human race. It is from such thought that ideologies are
constructed. Such schemes are but plans for subordinating and subduing other men
to the will of those who conceive them. Coordinating economies is an activity
beyond the capacity of any man, and a task for which there is no warrant or
commission. Control over others is a thing to be shunned, not sought. The good
parent finds joy in seeing his child taking over the management of his own
affairs. The successful parent is humbled by the accomplishments of his
offspring, for he sees in them much that could not have come from him. The
effective teacher is one whose students surpass his limited conceptions. Any
plan that entails the use<b> </b>of others without their individual consent is a
presumption. He who puts such a plan into effect is a tyrant.

The idea that has the world in its grip is a promise of eternal springtime. It
is a vision of arriving at that special moment of spring and remaining there
forever. It is delusion.

The idea brings destruction in its wake, not the euphoria of springtime. It
brings discord, hatred, war, terror, and the massed force of the state. That is
its record. The only element of springtime in the applied idea is, figuratively,
storms, tornadoes, floods, and violent winds. Amidst these, it offers not
shelter but insoluble problems of ever greater dimension.

When storm clouds descend, the traveler upon the road longs for the security of
home. It is a sound instinct. Confronted with elements beyond his power to
control, he longs for a man-sized place which he can order and manage. Home has
ever been the sign and symbol of that place of refuge. To return to it is a
return to basics, a return to fundamentals, a return to what life is about. The
storm recedes in importance as the returned traveler enters the familiar
household.

Such joys of springtime as man can have come from minding his own business,
providing for himself and his own, and fulfilling himself.

But what will become of us if we make these things our primary concern? How will
we get all the goods that we need or want? Will we not be drowned in a mass of
humanity resulting from over-population? How will the hungry be fed? Will we not
use up our limited resources? "0 ye of little faith." "Consider the lilies of
the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And yet I say
unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these."

It is for man to put his own house in order, not to order the world. "But seek
ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness; and all these things shall be
added unto you."

Let it be so.

This concludes the series. An Arlington House version of *World in the Grip of
an Idea* is in the works, and will be duly announced in The Freeman and in Notes
from FEE just as soon as publication date and price are known.

[^33_1]: Matthew 6:28-31, 33.

[^33_2]: Aldous Huxley, *Brave New World Revisited* (New York: Harper &amp;
  Brothers, 1958), p. 26.

[^33_3]: Steven Jantzen, Carolyn Jackson, Diana Reische, and Phillip Parker,
  *Politics and People* (New York: Scholastic Book Service, 1977), p. 159.

[^33_4]: *Ibid., p.* 172.

[^33_5]: Huxley, *op. cit., p.* 28.

